320  *  $-Adams  Cc41402 

Writings* 


MID-MANHATTAN  LIBRARY 

History  &  Social  Science  Department 

8  East  40th  Street 
New  York,  N.  Y.  10016 


NV 


PUBLIC  LIBRARY    THE  BRANCH  L  BR«R  ES 


3  3333  08737  1007 


>-•»    - .  • 

M 


.J  . 

V*8* 


KEEP  THIS  BOOK  CLEAN 

Borrowers  finding  this  book  pencil-marked,  written  upon,  mutilated  or 

unwarrantably   defaced,  are   expected  to  report  it  to  the  librarian. 

_, _: 


USE    0 


^ 


%" 
&$$ 


«4*h   «*^WP^M*«  • 

TW 

•:  JL'X-j. 


.  - 


WRITINGS 

OF 

JOHN    QUINCY   ADAMS 


THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY 

NEW  YORK   •   BOSTON   •   CHICAGO    •   DALLA1 
ATLANTA    •    SAN   FRANCISCO 

MACMILLAN  &  CO.,  LIMITED 

LONDON   •   BOMBAY   •  CALCUTTA 
MELBOURNE 

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA,  LTD. 

TORONTO 


WRITINGS 


OF 


JOHN    QUINCY    ADAMS 


EDITED    BY 

WORTHINGTON  CHAUNCEY  FORD 


VOL.   Ill 

I8CI»I8IC,     >,,; 


f 

r    ,      t         ••         »s 


,1  >      '         O     5 

..    - 


-    «  i  *  e     •>      a 

» 


fork 
THE    MACMILLAN    COMPANY 

1914 

All  rights  reserved 


'iT\7  YOr.K. 

PUBLIC  LIBRARY 


COPYRIGHT,  1914 
BY  CHARLES  FRANCIS  ADAMS 


Set  up  and  electrotyped.     Published  March,  1914. 


sao.% 
f\ 


CONTENTS 

I 8O I  PAGE 

October  13.    To  RUFUS  KING  ...  I 

Lands    at    Philadelphia.      Changes    in    the   cc/unti^- . 
Visitation  by  fever.    Dismissal  of  officers. 

December  n.    To  RUFUS  KING         .....          2 

Effect  of  peace  between  France  and  England.    Death 
of  Philip  Hamilton  in  a  duel. 

1802 
January  18.    To  RUFUS  KING  .....          3 

Meeting  of  Congress   and   the   President's   message. 
Repeal  of  internal  taxes. 

August  27.    To  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS          ...          6 

Letters  between  Samuel  and  John  Adams.    Charge  of 
favoring  a  monarchy. 


October  8.    To  RUFUS  3  TNG  •  , 


;  •>•:,• 

Divisions  in  the  pa-:ty-  of  the  administration.  Cal- 
lender's  attacks.  Strength  cf  -  the  administration. 
Triumph  not  enjoyed,  .v^tn  moderation.  Federalism 
dead  beyond  revival.  Yellow  lever  and  dysentery. 


.    ECCE  ITERUM     .......        10 

Election  to  State  Senate.    Defeated  for  Congress.    His 
two  orations. 

1803 
February  14.    To  HENRY  KNOX         .          .          .          .          .12 

Reasons  for  opposing  address  to  remove  justices  of 
the  Common  Pleas. 


RESERVE 


vi  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

April  27.    To  ROBERT  BIRD      ......       13 

Payment  of  his  bills  on  London.    On  signing  a  letter  of 
license.    Asks  for  explanations. 

&  « 

May  13.    To  WILLIAM  BARTLETT      .          .          .          .  15 

On  the  replies  of  Robert  Bird.    Commission  of  bank- 
ruptcy. 

May  13.    To  ROBERT  BIRD       ......        17 

A  meeting  of  his  creditors.     Desires  further  informa- 
tion.   Differences  in  statements  made. 

November  — .    RESOLUTION  ON  BOUNDARIES      ...        19 

November  25.    RESOLUTION  ON  TREATY  WITH  FRANCE       .        19 
November  25.    AMENDMENT  TO  THE  CONSTITUTION     .          .        20 

December  3.    To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE       .          .          .21 
Treatv  of  limits  with  Great  Britain  and  the  French 

m 

treaty  of  1803.    Mr.  King  may  be  able  to  answer. 

December  24.    To  BENJAMIN  RUSSELL      *f        ...       23 

Comments  published  in  the  Centinel  on  his  conduct. 
Desires  to  know  the  name  oi'  tlie  \vrli  er. 

V  /'     1804  ;tcl|ej 
January  4.    MOTION  ON  IMPEACHMENT      ....       25 

January  10.    MOTION  ON  TAXATION  OF  LOUISIANA      .          .       25 
.    NOTES  OF  SPEECH  ON  MOTION  ON  LOUISIANA       .       26 

January  21.    To  PETER  CHARDON  BROOKS          .          .          .31 

Engaging  counsel  for  suit.    Luther  Martin  and  his  fee. 
Request  for  papers. 


CONTENTS  vii 

PAGE 

March  6.    To  PETER  CHARDON  BROOKS     .          .          .  32 

Decision  of  the  court  unfavorable.  Need  of  procuring 
properly  authenticated  papers. 

March  6.    To  RUFUS  GREENE  AMORY  33 

Spanish  order  on  trade.    His  own  position. 

March  ii.    To  TIMOTHY  PICKERING  ....       34 

Statement  on  trial  of  Judge  Pickering.  Difficulties  in 
the  way. 

March  ii.    To  TIMOTHY  PICKERING  .          .          .          .36 

Sends  a  proposed  statement  to  be  laid  before  the  Sen- 
ate when  called  upon  to  vote  on  Pickering's  impeach- 
ment. 

May  25.    To  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS  .          .          .          38 

Madame  de  StaeTs  opinion  on  divorce.  The  French 
Convention.  Letters  of  Madame  de  Sevigne. 

June  17.    To  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS      .          .  39 

State  politics.    Presidential  electors.    Instructions  for 

Senators. 

•  :    • 

i 

r       •   „ 

July  13.    To  LOUISA  CATHERINE  AD^MS    ....       40 

Attempt  to  burn  Mount  Vernon.  Judge  Bowen's 
charge.  Pinkney  a-id:AiTn3trong.  • 

July  19-22.    To  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS        ...       41 

Hamilton  and  Burr  duel.  Jerome  Bonaparte.  Titles 
in  France. 

September  23.    To  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS    ...       43 

Installation  of  a  Lodge  of  Masons.  Quincy  a  Mason. 
An  English  edition  of  the  Silesian  Letters.  One  letter 
should  have  been  omitted.  Pretensions  as  author. 


viii  CONTENTS 

October-November.    PUBLIUS  VALERIUS  PAGE 

I.  Interests  of  Massachusetts  in  the  approaching  elec- 
tion.    Her  influence  in  the  Union  threatened.     Three 
occasions  for  display  of  intentions.      .          .          .          .46 

II.  Perez  Morton  and  President  Jefferson.    His  Yazoo 
land  interests.     Debt  operations  of  the  government      .        51 

III.  Relations  with  the  Barbary  powers.     Purchase 
of  Louisiana.     Peace  with  Great  Britain  and  France. 
Morton's   private   interests         .....        57 

IV.  Mode  of  choosing  electors  of  President.     Protests 
examined.    Reasons  for  opposition.    Huger's  motion     .        62 

V.  Ely's  motion.     Representation  under  the  Consti- 
tution.   Inequality  between  North  and  South.    Slavery 

and  taxation  and  representation         ....        69 

November  3.    To  JOHN  ADAMS          .....       77 

Talk  with  the  President.  The  British  frigates.  Trade 
with  St.  Domingo.  Peculiar  opinion  of  Jefferson.  Wil- 
kinson. 

November  — .    To  JOHN  ADAMS        .....       79 

The  President's  opinion  on  contraband  trade  ex- 
amined. Political  revolution  in  Massachusetts.  Protest 
from  Louisiana. 

December  n.    To  JCKN  ADAMS       "V  ...        82 

Effect  of  Elections  in  Massachusetts.  Morton's  ex- 
pectations. Appointments  to  office.  Benjamin  Austin, 
Jr.  Writing  his  memoirs.  , Bills  before  Congress.  Wil- 
liam Lyman  for  London.  The  President  and  Turreau. 

December  — .    REMARKS  ON  PROPOSED  AMENDMENT  TO  THE 

CONSTITUTION  ON  REPRESENTATION    ....       87 

December  24.    To  JOHN  ADAMS         .....      100 

Change  in  political  Massachusetts  and  consolation. 
Impeachment  of  Judge  Chase.  The  proposed  amend- 
ment to  the  Constitution.  Turreau  and  Marin.  A  bout 
with  Giles. 


CONTENTS  ix 

1 8O5  PAGE 

January  5.    To  JOHN  ADAMS     ......      104 

The  manner  of  Giles.    Treatment  of  Burr. 

January  24.    To  JOHN  ADAMS  .....      104 

His  occupations  and  public  business.  Government 
and  emulation.  His  consolation.  Measures  before  Con- 
gress. 

March  8.    To  JOHN  ADAMS       ......      106 

Constantly  occupied.  Impeachment  of  Judge  Chase. 
History  of  the  movement.  The  case  of  Pickering.  Ob- 
ject of  the  prosecutors.  Theories  of  impeachment  and 
practice.  Evidence  taken  at  trial.  The  final  question. 
Acquittal. 

March  14.    To  JOHN  ADAMS     .          .          .          .          .          .114 

Forms  of  questions  in  the  impeachment  trials. 
Charges  against  Judge  Chase  not  criminal.  The  entire 
bench  on  trial.  Amendments  to  the  Constitution. 
Burr's  valedictory.  Payment  of  witnesses. 

August  6.    To  SAMUEL  DEXTER         .....      123 

Appointment  as  professor  of  rhetoric  and  oratory. 
Question  of  attendance  and  time.  Elocution  of  students. 
Religious  test. 

October  n.    To  THE  CORPORATION  OF  HARVARD  COLLEGE     126 

Providing  a  substitute  professor.  A  single  not  a  dou- 
ble foundation.  An  impossible  system  of  instruction. 

December  6.    To  JOHN  ADAMS  .          .          .          .          .129 

The  President's  message.  Naval  deficiency  appropria- 
tion. Meeting  with  Captain  Landais. 

December  12.    To  RICHARD  RUSH     .          .          .          .          .131 
The  London  mission  and  his  wish  to  visit  Europe. 


x  CONTENTS 

1806         -  PAGE 

January  14.    To  JOHN  ADAMS  .          .          .          .          .131 

Probable  action  of  Congress  on  protection  of  com- 
merce. Reported  differences  with  Spain.  Landais  and 
Franklin.  Indian  visitors.  Senate  without  leader. 

February  — .    RESOLUTIONS     ......      133 

February  ii.    To  JOHN  ADAMS          .....      134 

Submission  to  France  and  defiance  of  Great  Britain. 
Possible  unsubstantial  terrors  against  Britain.  Ran- 
dolph's motion  on  the  judges.  His  study  of  the  classics 
and  interruptions. 

March  26.    To  WILLIAM  STEPHENS  SMITH  .          .          .138 

His  removal  from  office  and  connection  with  Miranda. 

April  16.    To  WILLIAM  STEPHENS  SMITH     ....      139 
Relations  with  Miranda.    Oration  for  son. 

April  1 8.    To  SAMUEL  BARRON  .....      140 

Questions  on  the  Tripolitan  War. 

May  i.    To  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS      .          .          .          .142 
Matters  at  New  York.    Affair  of  the  Leander. 

May  10.    To  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS    ....      142 

Inauguration   of   President   Webber   at    Cambridge. 
His  turn  next.    Lord  Selkirk. 

June  I.    To  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS      ....      143 
State  Legislature  meets  and  uncertainty  of  election. 

June  8.    To  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS      ....      144 
Contest  between  Strong  and  Sullivan. 


CONTENTS  xi 

PAGE 

June  18.    To  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS    ....      144 

His  unaugural  address  as  professor  in  the  College. 
Strong  gains  the  governorship.  Eclipse  of  the  sun. 

June  22.    To  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS    ....      147 
The  eclipse  obscured.    Death  of  George  Wythe. 

June  26.     To  THE  CORPORATION  OF  HARVARD  UNIVERSITY     148 

On  admitting  the  Sophomores  to  his  course.  Minute- 
ness of  detail  an  objection. 

June  29.    To  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS    .          .          .          .150 

Public  service  about  to  end.  Party  the  only  qualifica- 
tion for  office.  Dr.  Waterhouse. 

July  13.    To  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS     ....      152 

Dispute  of  the  Randolphs.  William  Smith  and  Mi- 
randa's expedition.  Letter  of  Yrujo. 

November  5.    To  NOAH  WEBSTER    .          .          .          .  153 

His  project  for  a  larger  dictionary.  Peculiarities  of 
spelling  and  principles  of  pronunciation.  Fashion  and 
innovation.  Vulgarisms  and  localisms. 

1807 
January  27.    To  JOHN  ADAMS  .          .          .          .          .158 

Burr  and  his  conspiracy.  Bill  to  suspend  habeas  corpus 
writ  rejected.  Prohibiting  importation  of  slaves.  Case 
of  Bollman  and  Swartwout.  Readings  in  the  classics. 

July  16.    CHESAPEAKE-LEOPARD  AFFAIR     ....      161 

October  28.    MOTION  ON  PRESIDENT'S  MESSAGE         .         .      162 
November  25.    MOTION  ON  IMPRESSMENTS          .          .          .      163 


xii  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

November  30.    To  JOHN  ADAMS         .          .          .          .          .163 

Overwhelmed  with  business.  Case  of  Senator  John 
Smith.  A  policy  of  procrastination. 

December  ii.    To  JOSEPH  HALL        .....      164 

Action  of  Admiral  Berkeley  disavowed.  The  non- 
importation act. 

December  27.    To  JOHN  ADAMS          .....      166 

Expulsion  under  the  Constitution.  Report  on  Senator 
Smith.  The  aggression  bill.  Passage  of  an  unlimited 
embargo.  British  proclamation  on  impressments.  The 
killing  of  Panton.  Plagiat  or  man-stealing.  Engaging 
foreign  seamen  and  contracts.  His  own  position  critical. 
Arrival  of  Monroe. 

December  — .    REPORT  ON  SENATOR  JOHN  SMITH       .  173 

1808 

January  10.    To  JAMES  SULLIVAN     .          .          .          .          .185 
Causes  of  the  embargo. 

January  ii.    MOTION  ON  THE  EMBARGO    ....      187 

January  27.    To  JOHN  ADAMS  .          .          .          .          .188 

Impressments.  Foresees  end  of  his  public  service. 
The  presidential  election. 

March  31.    To  HARRISON  GRAY  OTIS         .          .          .          .189 

Reply  to  Pickering's  letter. 

APPENDIX  (1824)     ......     224 

April  20.    To  ABIGAIL  ADAMS  .          .          .          .          .232 

Disapprobation  of  parents.  Bradley's  caucus.  Bur- 
dens imposed  upon  him.  Pickering's  letter  and  answer. 


CONTENTS  xiii 

PAGE 

May  14.    To  GEORGE  BOYD      ......      235 

Cannot  apply  to  administration  in  favor  of  relatives. 

June  8.    To  THE  GENERAL  COURT  OF  MASSACHUSETTS       .      237 
Resigns  his  seat  as  Senator  of  the  United  States. 

August  22.    To  ORCHARD  COOK         .          .          .          .          .     238 

Reasons  for  resigning.  The  approaching  presidential 
election.  Town  meetings  on  the  embargo.  Events  in 
Spain. 

November  15.    To  WILLIAM  BRANCH  GILES        .          .          .     242 

The  legislature  of  Massachusetts  made  his  resignation 
necessary.  Must  have  perfect  freedom  of  agency.  Con- 
fidence in  the  Senate.  A  spirit  of  martyrdom.  His 
political  future.  Foreign  and  domestic  policies.  Con- 
tinuing the  embargo  law. 

November  17.    To  EZEKIEL  BACON  ....     248 

War  with  England  or  with  France.  Arming  for  de- 
fence of  commerce.  Embargo  or  non-intercourse.  The 
federalists  and  civil  war.  Presidential  electors  in  Massa- 
chusetts. Definition  of  tories. 

November  25.    To  ORCHARD  COOK  ....      253 

Alternatives  of  embargo.  Government  should  protect 
citizens  and  their  property.  English  policy.  Report  on 
foreign  relations. 

December  5.    To  NAHUM  PARKER      .....     257 

The  Campbell  report  on  foreign  relations.  Proposed 
convention  on  division  of  States.  Dangers  of  internal 
dissension. 

December  8.    To  ORCHARD  COOK      .....     260 

Suggested  political  advancement.  The  Vice  Presi- 
dency. Anticipation  of  Anderson.  Report  on  foreign 
relations  and  the  embargo. 


xiv  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

December  10.     To  WILLIAM  BRANCH  GILES     .          .          .     263 

Speech  on  embargo.  Threats  of  resistance  and  of 
separation.  Judicial  decisions  and  influences.  Trade 
should  be  opened.  Death  of  Governor  Sullivan. 

December  14.    To  SAMUEL  LATHAM  MITCHILL     .          .          .      265 

Hillhouse's  resolution.  Reasons  for  removing  restric- 
tions on  trade.  Books  purchased  for  the  Library  of 
Congress. 

December  15.    To  JOSEPH  ANDERSON       ....      268 

Could  not  act  under  instructions  of  the  legislature. 
Senate  majority  approved.  No  submission  of  British  in- 
solence. Gallatin's  proposition.  Difficulties  of  execut- 
ing it. 

December  19.    To  ORCHARD  COOK    .....     272 

Embargo  should  be  removed.  Arming  of  merchant 
vessels.  Meetings  on  the  embargo.  Congressional 
speeches.  A  fable  applied.  Sullivan's  death.  Legisla- 
tive requests.  Meeting  of  republicans.  Export  duties 
by  Order  in  Council. 

December  21.    To  EZEKIEL  BACON  ....     276 

Reasons  for  reserve.  Contest  over  the  embargo.  Law 
cannot  be  executed.  Friends  of  the  administration. 
Embargo  no  longer  coercion  against  England  or  France. 
The  British  Orders  in  Council. 

December  26.    To  WILLIAM  BRANCH  GILES        .          .          .     281 

His  defence  against  Pickering.  The  British  Orders  in 
Council.  Deliberation  and  execution.  Federalists 
favor  Great  Britain.  Massachusetts  politics.  National 
independence  at  stake. 


CONTENTS  xv 


PAGE 
January  16.  To  WILLIAM  BRANCH  GILES    ....     286 

Legislative  resolutions  in  Massachusetts  and  New 
Hampshire.  Lloyd's  motion  for  Rose's  correspondence. 
Violations  of  the  embargo  unpunished. 

March  5.  To  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS*  ....     288 

Inauguration  of  Madison.  Conversation  with  Jeffer- 
son. Business  of  Congress.  The  new  Cabinet.  Warning 
to  young  federal  members. 

March  9.  To  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS    ....      291 

Is  nominated  for  the  Russian  mission.     Senate  and 
embargo. 

April  17.    To  SKELTON  JONES  .....     292 

Sketch  of  his  career. 

April-May.     REVIEW  OF  THE  "  WORKS  OF  FISHER   AMES"  305 

April  30.    To  THE  PRESIDENT  .          .          .          .          .     311 

Introducing  Benjamin  Pickman. 

June  15.    To  EZEKIEL  BACON  .         .         .         .         .312 

Responsibility  for  current  measures.  Embargo  and 
non-intercourse.  Federalists  and  the  President.  British 
Orders  in  Council.  Exclusion  of  foreign  armed  vessels. 

June  22.    To  WILLIAM  EUSTIS  .          .          .          .          .316 

Letters  of  John  Adams  to  Boston  Patriot.  Honesty 
and  statesmen.  Confidence  in  Madison.  State  meas- 
ures. France  and  England.  Postscript. 

June  27.    COMMISSION  TO  RUSSIA      .....     321 

[SECRETARY  OF   STATE  TO  WILLIAM  SHORT,   Septem- 
ber 8,  1808.]     ........     322 


xvi  CONTENTS 


PAGE 


July  5.    To  ROBERT  SMITH       .          .          .          .          .          .328 

Acknowledgment  for  appointment.  Accepts  and 
names  date  of  sailing.  His  secretary. 

July  7.  To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE       .          .          .  330 

Navigation  of  Baltic  and  his  sailing.  William  Steuben 
Smith  as  secretary,  and  voluntary  aids. 

July  16.    To  WILLIAM  EUSTIS  .          .          .          .  332 

Reasons  for  accepting  the  Russian  mission.  Desires 
his  correspondence.  Daschkoff's  offer.  Relations  with 
France. 

August  7.     To  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS        .          .          -334 

Publication  of  his  lectures.  The  valedictory  part  of 
the  closing  lecture  explained.  His  friends. 

August  9.    To  ABIGAIL  ADAMS  .          .          .          .          -337 

Noah  Webster's  dictionary. 

August  1 6.    To  WILLIAM  PLUMER     .          .          .          .          .338 

Will  prize  letters  from  him.  A  congenial  spirit.  His 
proposed  history  of  America.  Union  should  be  the 
moral.  Cod  fishing  and  history  of  the  United  States. 

September  23.    To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE     .          .  343 

Incidents  of  voyage.  Brought  to  by  a  British  armed 
vessel.  American  ships  captured  by  Danish  privateers. 
Will  go  to  Copenhagen. 

September  30.    To  HANS  RODOLPH  SAABYE         .          .  346 

Captured  American  vessels.  Hardships  imposed  on 
masters.  Has  not  been  able  to  see  Count  Bernstorff. 
Wishes  him  to  make  representation.  Conduct  of  United 
States  towards  Denmark.  Suppression  of  Danish  priva- 
teers. 


CONTENTS  xvii 

PAGE 

October  26.    To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE       .         .         .     351 

Arrives  at  St.  Petersburg,  and  his  reception  by  Count 
Romanzofl.  Disapprobation  of  Denmark's  proceedings 
against  American  commerce.  Liberal  measures  de- 
sired. Harris  praised.  Treaty  between  Russia  and 
Sweden. 

November  24.  To  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS     .          .          -355 

His  journey  to  Copenhagen.  Taking  of  the  Concordia. 
Passage  of  the  Sound.  Proposed  abandonment  of  voy- 
age. The  islands  of  Denmark. 

November  28.    To  SYLVANUS  BOURNE       ....     360 

Non-intercourse  adopted.  Effect  of  current  events  in 
Europe  and  the  United  States.  Interest  in  maintaining 
restrictions  on  commerce.  Champagny's  offer. 

December  4.    To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE          .          .          .     361 

Representation  on  two  American  vessels.  British 
forged  papers.  Case  of  Graham.  A  form  of  gazette. 

December  14.    To  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS     .          .          .     366 

Stay  at  Bornholm.  Determination  to  proceed  on  the 
voyage.  Navigation  of  the  Baltic.  Reaches  Cronstadt 
and  St.  Petersburg. 

1810 

January  3.   To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE    ....     369 

Would  have  sailed  in  the  Essex.  Need  of  passport. 
Registers  of  London  make.  Import  of  colonial  mer- 
chandise prohibited.  Emperor's  message  to  Denmark. 

January  7.     To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE       .          .          -3/2 

Conference  with  Count  Romanzoff  on  American  ves- 
sels detained  by  Denmark.    Great  Britain  and  a  general 
peace.     Denmark  has  not  acted  voluntarily.     Colonial 


xviii  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

merchandise  and  the  United  States.  Restrictive  meas- 
ures of  profit  to  England.  Russian  commerce  with  Eng- 
land. Emperor  has  ordered  representations  to  Denmark 
on  American  ships.  Baron  de  Blome's  statement.  Colo- 
nial merchandise. 

January  17.     To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE       .          .          -3^5 

Complaint  of  France  on  American  trade.  Interview 
with  the  French  Ambassador.  Can  discriminate  against 
British  trade.  Modification  of  Imperial  Council. 

January  31.     To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE       .          .          .389 

Renews  application  to  Danish  Minister.  Forbes  and 
Joy  on  the  ground.  Jackson's  character.  Report  of  a 
general  embargo.  Peace  negotiations.  The  new  Council. 

February  8.    To  ABIGAIL  ADAMS      .....     393 

Emerson's  discourse  and  its  application.  Is  sending 
letters  by  every  opportunity.  Expense  of  forming  an 
establishment.  Economy  not  general.  The  bright  side. 

February  14.    To  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS      .          .          .     397 

Contest  between  France  and  England.  Concerns  of 
Europe.  The  Emperor  Alexander. 

February  19.    To  GEORGE  JOY        .....     399 

Is  unable  to  answer  his  questions.  Commerce  between 
Russia  and  England.  Effect  of  the  restrictions  on  trade 
by  France  and  Great  Britain. 

February  28.    To  WILLIAM  EUSTIS     .....     401 

Cultivation  of  hemp  and  labor.  Conduct  of  France. 
Propositions  to  England.  Friendly  disposition  of  Russia. 
Count  RomanzofFs  position.  Napoleon's  new  wife. 
Champagny's  letter  to  Armstrong. 


CONTENTS  xix 

PAGE 

March  24.    To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE    ....     406 

Reply  of  the  Danish  government  to  the  Russian  Em- 
peror. Principles  of  British  merchants  illustrated.  Burr 
in  Europe.  Trade  treaty  with  Portugal.  Complaint 
against  Captain  Arnold. 

March  30.    To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE    .          .          .          .411 

First  appearance  of  the  American  flag  upon  the  Black 
Sea.  Case  of  Cutts'  vessel.  Danish  privateers. 
Prospects  of  peace  with  England.  French  confiscations 
of  American  vessels.  Arrival  of  J.  S.  Smith. 

April  19.    To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE     .          .          .          .416 

The  American  vessel  at  Odessa.  Relations  between 
France  and  Russia.  Cession  of  land  from  Austria  to 
Russia  and  Napoleon's  marriage.  Peace  with  Turkey. 
Russia  and  American  commerce. 

April  21.    To  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS    ....     420 

Prospects  of  future  peace  in  Europe.  Efforts  of  Eng- 
land to  oppose  Napoleon's  projects.  The  expedition  to 
Walcheren.  The  mission  of  Jackson.  Change  in  the 
ministry.  Need  of  lesson  to  France. 

April  30.    To  JOHN  ADAMS      ......     424 

Friendly  disposition  and  personal  attentions  of  the 
Russian  government.  Danger  from  French  influence. 
Peace  and  Napoleon's  marriage.  Claim  to  divine 
honors.  Hatred  of  republics. 

May  10.  To  JOSEPH   PITCAIRN         .          .  .          .     427 

Relations  with  the  French  Ambassador.  Political  and 
commercial  measures  of  France. 

May  10.    To  WILLIAM  EUSTIS  .....     429 

Hemp  and  flax.  Proceedings  of  Denmark  on  priva- 
teers. Agents  to  make  representations.  Sufferings  of 
Denmark  and  commerce.  Question  of  convoys.  Nego- 
tiations for  a  general  peace.  Newspapers  in  Europe. 


xx  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

May  ii.  To  GEORGE  JOY         ......     433 

Danish  ordinance  on  privateering.  The  attack  on 
Copenhagen  and  resentment  against  England.  Con- 
voys. Criticism  of  the  ordinance.  Reconciliation  with 
England.  Napoleon  and  England. 

May  19.    To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE     ....     439 

Denmark  and  convoys.  Trade  under  licenses.  Con- 
suls in  Prussia. 

May  25.  To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE      ....     442 

American  ships  on  the  Black  Sea.  Sweden  and  the 
Porte.  A  treaty  between  the  United  States  and  Turkey. 
Popular  disturbances  at  Constantinople.  Turkey  and 
European  States. 

June  6.    To  ABIGAIL  ADAMS     ......     447 

Return  of  the  Horace.  Jackson's  mission.  American 
commerce  with  Europe.  Criticism  of  the  Russian  mis- 
sion. European  interpretation  of  American  politics. 
The  Massachusetts  system. 

June  25.    To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE     ....     450 

Finances  of  the  Empire.  Assignation  bank  bills.  Na- 
ture of  the  loan.  Acts  of  Admiral  Saumarez.  Danish 
privateers. 

June  30.    To  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS     ....     454 

Spain  and  Portugal.  Neutral  trade  annihilated.  Sys- 
tem of  trade  licenses.  War  between  Russia  and  Turkey. 

July  25.    To  ABIGAIL  ADAMS    ......     455 

The  Massachusetts  election.  The  disunion  projects. 
Terror  of  war  with  England.  Condition  of  Sweden. 
Murder  of  Fersen.  Abdication  of  the  King  of  Holland. 


CONTENTS  xxi 

PAGE 

August  3.    To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE    ....     460 

Forged  ships  papers  from  England.  Death  of  the 
Queen  of  Prussia.  Prussian  edict  against  American  ves- 
sels. France  annexes  Holland.  Decree  on  American 
property.  Favorable  position  of  American  commerce  in 
Russian  ports. 

August  3.    To   WILLIAM   GRAY         .....     465 

Acknowledges  offer  of  credit.  Rules  of  conduct  laid 
down. 

August  1 6.     To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE       .          .          .     467 

Prussian  ordinance  against  American  trade.  Com- 
merce and  revenue  of  England  not  injured.  Reasons  for 
attack  on  American  ships.  Sweden  and  the  succession. 
French  certificates  of  origin. 

• 

August  19.     To  WILLIAM  GRAY       .....     471 

Emperor  desires  to  take  a  negro  into  his  service. 
Wishes  him  to  indemnify  master  and  send  wife  and 
children. 

August  27.     To  JOSEPH  HALL        .....     473 

Circumstances  have  justified  his  position.  Course  of 
the  federalist  party.  Reason  for  defeat. 

August  31.     To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE       .          .          .     475 

Trade  with  Indians  in  Russian  North  America. 
Mecklenburg's  ordinance  against  American  ships.  The 
Danish  chancery  patent.  Revocation  of  the  Berlin  and 
Milan  decrees.  Import  duties.  George  Joy's  licenses. 

September  2.     To  JOHN  ADAMS        .          .          .          .          .481 

Federal  party  and  the  British  faction.  England  and 
Napoleon. 


xxii  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

September  5.    To  SAMUEL  LATHAM  MITCHILL     .          .          .     483 

Difficulty  of  distinguishing  between  English  and 
American  vessels  in  Russian  ports.  Revocation  of  the 
French  decrees.  Arts  and  sciences.  Krusenstern's 
voyage. 

September  5.    To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE      .          .          .     486 

Trade  with  the  Russian  settlements  in  North  America. 
Russia's  relations  with  China.  Claims  to  the  Columbia 
River.  American  ships  in  Russian  ports.  The  Commis- 
sion of  Neutral  Navigation.  Reasons  for  despatch. 
Commercial  interests  of  Russia.  Baron  Campenhausen. 
Emperor's  sentiments  towards  America  unchanged. 
French  influence.  France  and  the  United  States.  Ves- 
sels admitted.  A  treaty  of  commerce. 

September  8.    To  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS      .          .          .     496 

Training  of  his  son  George.  Distribution  of  the  lec- 
tures. Revolution  in  politics. 

September  10.     To  JOHN  POPE        .....     499 

His  marriage  with  Miss  Johnson.  Retirement  from 
the  Senate.  Foreign  relations  and  the  non-intercourse. 
Neutrality. 

September  20.    To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE     .          .          .     503 

Danish  privateers  again.  A  British  blockade  of  Elsi- 
neur  and  convoys.  Payment  of  the  Sound  duties. 
Baron  Blome.  Mr.  Joy's  licenses.  The  French  decrees. 

October  6.    To  WILLIAM  PLUMER      .....     507 

Few  letters  received  from  America.  The  New  Eng- 
land elections.  Newspaper  criticism.  Dependence  on 
party.  Repeal  of  non-intercourse  act.  European  poli- 
tics. 


CONTENTS  xxiii 

PAGE 

October  14.    To  ABIGAIL  ADAMS      .          .          .          .          .512 

Public  measures  and  the  elections.  Return  of  General 
Armstrong.  Anthology  review  of  lectures.  On  friend- 
ship. Praise  and  censure.  Errors  in  the  book.  His  posi- 
tion at  the  Court. 

October  16.    FROM   JAMES   MADISON         .          .          .          .518 

Permission  to  retire  if  private  reasons  compel.  Rea- 
sons for  remaining  in  the  service. 

October  20.    To  WILLIAM  GRAY       .          .          .          .  519 

American  business  interests  in  Russia. 

October  23.    To  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS       .          .          .521 

Newspaper  abuse.  Comparison  with  the  diplomatic 
corps  in  manner  of  living. 

October  25.    To  ABIGAIL  ADAMS       .....     523 

The  forged  ship's  papers.  Will  show  no  consideration 
for  holders.  His  real  offence.  Merchants  of  St.  Peters- 
burg. 

October  27.     To  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS       .          .          .526 

The  Anthology  review  of  the  Lectures.  The  Silesian 
letters.  Newspapers  from  Boston.  The  first  levee  of 
the  season.  Special  attentions  at  Hermitage  Theatre. 
No  expectation  of  gratitude.  Education  of  his  sons. 

November  3.    To  EZEKIEL  BACON     .....     530 

Motives  for  the  mission  to  Russia.  Results  obtained. 
Foreign  influence  in  domestic  politics.  Neutrality 
should  be  preserved.  European  colonial  system.  North 

European  events. 

« 

November  13.    To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE     .          .          .     534 

Closing  of  navigation.  A  consul  for  Gothenburg. 
Sale  of  American  ship's  papers.  Consuls  as  merchants. 
Recommendations. 


xxiv  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

November  28.    To  ABIGAIL  ADAMS    .          .          .          .          .     53  8 

Delay  in  receipt  of  letters.  Changes  at  Harvard  Col- 
lege. Manner  of  heating  houses.  Treatment  of  win- 
dows. Difference  in  winters.  Napoleon's  burning 
decree. 

December  i.    To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE      .          .          .     543 

Arrival  of  American  vessels  and  official  action.  Oper- 
ation of  Napoleon's  tariff  and  decree.  Effect  in  England. 
Distress  of  merchants.  Emperor  firm  in  favoring 
commerce. 

December  17.    To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE     .          .          .     548 

Admission  of  American  vessels.  Prospects  of  peace 
between  Great  Britain  and  France.  The  convoy  below 
Gothenburg.  The  decree  for  burning  colonial  merchan- 
dise. Bernadotte  in  Sweden.  Demands  of  France. 
Russia's  refusal. 

December  27.    To  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE     .          .          .     553 

Return  of  W.  B.  Adams.  Interview  with  Baron  Cam- 
penhausen.  Relations  between  Russia  and  France. 
J.  Spear  Smith  leaves. 


WRITINGS 

OF 

JOHN    QUINCY   ADAMS 


WRITINGS  OF  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 

TO  RUFUS  KING 

QUINCY,  13  October,  1801. 
DEAR  SIR: 

•  •••••• 

We  landed  at  Philadelphia  the  4th  of  last  month,  after  a 
tedious  though  not  unpleasant  passage  of  fifty-eight  days 
from  Hamburg.  My  wife  with  her  child  went  on  to  her 
father's  family  at  Washington,  and  I  came  here.  The  day 
after  tomorrow  I  purpose  setting  out  to  go  and  bring  her 
home.  In  the  course  of  a  month  I  hope  to  be  here  again,  and 
shall  immediately  resume  the  practice  of  the  law,  and  fix  my 
residence  in  Boston. 

The  appearance  of  our  country  has  very  much  improved 
since  I  left  it  in  1794.  I  find  everywhere  the  marks  of  peace 
within  our  walls,  and  prosperity  within  our  palaces  —  for 
palaces  they  may  truly  be  called,  those  splendid  and  costly 
mansions  which  since  my  departure  seem  to  have  shot  up 
from  the  earth  by  enchantment. 

The  pleasure  of  these  prospects  is  in  some  measure  damped 
by  that  of  the  afflictions  from  which  we  are  not  yet  ex- 
empted. Several  of  our  large  towns,  New  York,  Norfolk, 
Charleston,  S.  C.,  and  some  others  are  bleeding  again  under 
the  scourge  of  pestilential  fevers.  But  as  they  did  not  ap- 
pear until  a  much  later  than  the  usual  period,  and  as  the 
cold  season  is  rapidly  approaching,  we  hope  for  speedy  relief 
from  this  distressing  calamity. 

Upon  the  subject  of  our  politics  I  know  not  how  far  it  may 

i 


2  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1801 

be  proper  to  tell  you  all  I  have  observed  since  my  return,  and 
should  I  tell  you  all,  it  would  not  give  you  a  clue  to  the 
projects  and  views  of  any  party.  The  meeting  of  Congress 
will  doubtless  discover  some  of  them,  and  I  shall  write  you 
again  upon  the  subject  with  the  utmost  confidence. 

The  dismissal  of  some  public  officers  and  the  appointment 
(provisionally)  of  some  others  have  given  rise  to  considerable 
controversy.  Remonstrances,  replies  and  pamphlets,  pro 
and  con,  have  furnished  much  conversation  for  idlers,  and 
much  discussion  for  disputants.  This  has  been  hitherto  the 
only  topic  of  material  censure  upon  the  present  administra- 
tion, and  individual  feelings  have  given  it  a  show  of  im- 
portance much  beyond  that  which  belongs  to  it.1  I  am  happy 
to  know  that  from  the  removals  of  public  officers  abroad  it 
has  constantly  been  determined  to  except  you,  and  that  the 
President  has  expressed  his  entire  satisfaction  with  the  man- 
ner in  which  you  have  served  the  public  in  your  present 
mission.  I  am,  &c. 

TO  RUFUS  KING 

QUINCY,  ii  December,  1801. 
DEAR  SIR: 

««««•«« 

At  New  York  on  my  return  home  I  first  heard  of  the  peace 
concluded  between  France  and  England,  which  was  very 

1  Jefferson  explains  at  length  his  ideas  on  removals  and  appointments  in  his  cor- 
respondence; and  a  letter  to  William  Short,  of  October  3,  1801,  expresses  his  views 
about  the  time  Adams  was  writing.  Writings  of  Jefferson  (Ford),  VIII.  95. 

"The  session  of  Congress  is  about  commencing,  with  a  majority  in  both  houses 
favorable  to  the  views  of  the  present  administration.  Great  tranquillity  prevails 
throughout  the  country,  and  the  violence  of  party  spirit  has  very  much  subsided. 
Prospects  of  an  unpleasant  controversy  with  Spain  began  to  discover  themselves, 
but  there  is  reason  to  expect  they  will  disappear  at  the  termination  of  the  war  in 
Europe."  To  Joseph  Pitcairn,  December  4,  1801.  Ms. 


i8o2]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  3 

unexpected  here,  as  it  appears  to  have  been  even  in  London.1 
Its  influence  upon  our  affairs,  public  and  private,  will  no 
doubt  be  important,  and  not  in  every  respect  favorable. 
Much  partial  inconvenience  is  to  be  foreseen,  but  if  the  en- 
terprise and  industry  of  our  countrymen  is  checked  in  one 
quarter,  I  believe  it  will  soon  find  or  make  its  way  in  another. 
The  prices  of  goods  have  generally  fallen,  and  some  com- 
parative stagnation  of  commerce  must  ensue.  Our  mer- 
chants and  shipbuilders,  however,  anticipate  a  temporary 
advantage  from  the  want  of  vessels  in  France,  where  they 
hope  to  find  a  good  market  for  many  of  their  supernumerary 
ships. 

Our  internal  affairs  continue  to  present  an  aspect  of  great 
tranquillity.  The  session  of  Congress  must  have  commenced, 
but  we  have  not  yet  received  the  President's  speech. 

About  a  fortnight  since  General  Hamilton's  eldest  son 
[Philip]  was  killed  in  a  duel  with  a  Mr.  Eacker.  He  is  said  to 
have  been  a  young  man  of  great  promise.  .  .  .2 


TO  RUFUS  KING 

BOSTON,  18  January,  1802. 
DEAR  SIR: 

•  •••••• 

Our  political  atmosphere  still  remains  serene.  Since  the 
meeting  of  Congress  it  appears  there  is  a  large  majority  in 
the  House  of  Representatives  and  a  decided,  though  small 
one,  in  the  Senate,  favorable  to  the  views  of  the  executive.3 

1  This  refers  to  the  truce  that  resulted  in  the  treaty  of  Amiens,  signed  March  25, 
1802,  by  Great  Britain,  France,  Spain  and  Holland. 

2  Hamilton,  History  of  the  Republic,  VII.  499. 

8  Henry  Adams,  in  his  History  of  the  United  States  of  America,  1801-1817,  has 


4  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1802 

4 

The  measures  recommended  by  the  President  at  the  opening 
of  the  session  are  all  popular,  in  all  parts  of  the  Union;  but 
they  are  all  undergoing  a  scrutiny  in  the  public  newspapers, 
more  able  and  more  severe,  than  they  will  probably  meet  in 
either  House  of  Congress.  A  writer  in  the  New  York  Evening 
Post,  said  to  be  General  Hamilton,  has  undertaken  particu- 
larly to  point  out  great  and  comprehensive  errors  of  system 
in  the  message,  and  his  doctrines  find  great  approbation 
among  the  federalists,  and  among  all  those  who  consider 
themselves  as  the  profound  thinkers  of  the  nation.  These 
papers  will  without  doubt  be  transmitted  to  you  by  your 
friends  at  New  York  and,  with  the  President's  message  and 
the  report  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  will  give  you 
the  fairest  view  of  what  our  administration  and  our  opposi- 
tion are  at  this  time.  As  to  Congress,  there  has  yet  been  no 
subject  of  debate  before  them  which  has  called  forth  any 
energy  of  opposition.  The  apparently  leading  ministerial 
members  are  General  Smith,  Mr.  Giles  and  Mr.  Randolph. 
The  Vice  President  has  not  yet  made  his  appearance,  being 
detained  by  necessary  attention  to  his  private  concerns  at 
New  York. 

The  report  from  the  Treasury  exhibits  a  pleasing  view  of 
the  present  state  of  our  finances.  It  is  merely  a  statement, 
and  avoids  with  caution  the  proposal  of  any  measures.  The 
President,  however,  has  drawn  from  it  the  inference  that  our 
internal  taxes  ought  to  be  repealed.  This  measure  will  prob- 
ably be  carried  into  effect.  The  established  system  of  natur- 
alization and  the  judicial  courts  will  have  the  same  fate.  Of 
all  these  changes  the  advantages  are  immediate,  obvious, 
popular  and  trifling.  Their  probable  inconveniences  are 

treated  so  fully  and  ably  the  period  covered,  as  to  leave  little  to  his  successors  to 
add  and  less  to  amend.  Adams'  Memoirs  should  also  be  constantly  read  in  con- 
nection with  these  letters  and  state  papers. 


i8o2]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  5 

remote,  are  not  therefore  discernible  to  the  short  sight  of  the 
million,  and  are  of  the  most  weighty  consequences.  As  pop- 
ularity is  the  fundamental  principle  both  of  our  legislative 
and  executive,  they  will  be  satisfied  to  provide  for  the  occa- 
sions of  the  day,  and  leave  future  times  to  take  care  of  them- 
selves. 

With  the  highest  regard,  &C.1 

1  April  5,  Adams  was  elected  a  State  Senator.  Memoirs,  April  5,  1802.  The 
history  of  the  federal  party  in  Massachusetts  from  1802  to  1815,  the  relations  of 
Adams  to  the  political  parties,  and  the  record  and  explanation  of  his  course  on 
public  measures  and  policy,  were  fully  expressed  in  his  "Reply  to  the  Appeal  of  the 
Massachusetts  Federalists,"  prepared  in  1829,  but  not  published  until  1877,  in 
Adams,  New  England  Federalism,  1800-1815.  This  "Reply"  will  appear  in  a  later 
volume  of  these  Writings. 

"In  May,  1802,  Mr.  Adams  attended  a  federal  caucus,  called  to  nominate  coun- 
sellors. At  this  meeting  Mr.  Adams  proposed  that/owr  of  the  counsellors  should  be 
of  the  republican  party.  The  federal  leaders  said  lthis  man  is  not  our  friend,  but 
against  us.'  On  the  only  question  which  divided  parties  at  the  spring  session,  Mr. 
Adams  voted  with  the  republicans.  At  the  winter  session,  his  federal  friends  in 
Boston  applied  for  a  Bank  charter,  and  great  efforts  were  made  to  secure  his  support. 
He  came  out,  at  the  hazard  of  his  popularity,  in  opposition  to  the  wishes  of  his 
friends,  the  next  day,  and  made  a  speech  in  opposition  to  the  Bank.  Failing  to 
prevent  the  grant  of  a  charter,  he  proposed  a  new  section,  by  which  the  subscrip- 
tion to  the  stock  should  be  open  to  all  the  citizens  of  the  Commonwealth:  when 
this  was  rejected,  he  voted  in  the  negative  on  the  final  passage  of  the  bill. 

"The  same  session,  the  Senate  was  divided  on  a  petition  for  the  removal  of  two 
republican  Judges,  the  federal  members  voted  in  the  affirmative,  the  republican  in 
the  negative.  Mr.  Adams  voted  in  the  negative,  and  in  company  with  Mr.  Wood- 
man, entered  a  protest  on  the  record."  Independent  Chronicle  and  Boston  Patriot, 
May  27,  1828.  The  first  incident  occurred  May  27,  1802,  and  Adams  then  proposed 
to  admit  to  the  Council  a  proportional  representation  of  the  minority.  Adams, 
New  England  Federalism,  57;  Memoirs,  sub  dat. 


6  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1802 

TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS  1 

BOSTON,  27  August,  1802. 

I  duly  received  your  letters  of  the  2ist  enclosing  the 
pamphlet  of  Gentz.  .  .  . 

You  have  seen  two  letters  from  your  father  to  S.  Adams, 
written  in  1790,  lately  published  in  the  newspapers.2  They 
have  been  attacked  with  characteristic  violence  and  bitter- 
ness, by  the  fifty-dollar  men  at  Washington,  Worcester  and 
Boston.3  They  are  defended  in  the  Boston  Gazette.  The  first 
publication  was  to  defeat  the  basest  misrepresentations, 
which  were  circulating  here  by  the  paid  slanderers,  who  had 
seen  them,  by  the  treachery  of  the  old  prophet,  and  who  were 
affirming  that  the  letters  in  so  many  words  urged  the  es- 
tablishment of  an  hereditary  monarchy  and  nobility  in  this 
country,  and  named  the  families  of  which  this  nobility  was 
to  be  composed.  Judge  how  much  the  publication  has  ex- 
asperated those  fellows,  by  taking  the  lie  out  of  their  mouths 
and  holding  it  up  to  the  public  view.  They  are  flouncing, 
and  foaming  and  spouting,  and  dashing  with  the  tail  at  a 
furious  rate;  but  the  harpoon  is  in  them;  they  shall  have  their 
full  length  of  rope  to  plunge  downward;  and  then  if  they  are 
not  drawn  up,  cut  up,  barrelled  up  and  tried  down  for  the 
benefit  of  the  public,  say  to  all  the  world  that  I  am  the  dis- 
grace of  New-England  whale-men.  Your's  faithfully. 

1  From  the  collection  of  Mr.  William  Nelson,  Paterson,  New  Jersey. 

2  Printed  in  a  pamphlet  in  1802,  with  an  advertisement  by  an  unknown  hand. 
They  are  reprinted  in  Works  of  John  Adams,  VI.  405. 

3  Probably  a  reference  to  Jefferson's  gift  to  Callender,  and  thus  to  a  subsidised 
press. 


i8o2]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  7 

TO  RUFUS  KING 

BOSTON,  8  October,  1802. 
DEAR  SIR: 

•  •••••• 

We  have  enjoyed  during  the  summer  an  extraordinary 
degree  of  tranquillity,  and  since  the  session  of  Congress  ter- 
minated in  May  no  public  event  of  material  importance  has 
happened.  The  newspapers  have  been  chiefly  filled  with  per- 
sonal attacks  upon  the  President  and  Vice  President,  com- 
ing from  different  and  perhaps  opposite  quarters  —  all  aris- 
ing originally  from  divisions  in  their  own  party.  These 
divisions  have  occasioned  animosities  of  no  small  inveteracy 
between  individuals.  You  have  doubtless  been  better  in- 
formed of  the  transactions  at  New  York  than  it  would  be  in 
my  power  to  inform  you.  The  warfare  there  has  been  be- 
tween the  friends  of  Mr.  Burr  and  those  of  the  Clinton 
family.  In  Virginia  the  principal  batteries  have  been 
pointed  at  Mr.  Jefferson  by  a  Scotsman  named  Callender,1 
of  whom  you  have  probably  heard  heretofore.  He  writes 
under  the  influence  of  personal  resentment  and  revenge;  but 
the  effect  of  his  publications  upon  the  reputation  of  the 
President  has  been  considerable. 

What  the  consequences  of  these  internal  feuds  in  the  ruling 
party  will  be  is  not  yet  apparent.  But  independent  of  them, 
and  considered  as  a  single  party  in  opposition  to  the  federal- 
ists, the  strength  of  the  present  administration  is  continually 
increasing.  It  has  obtained  and  preserves  an  irresistible  pre- 
ponderancy  in  thirteen  of  the  sixteen  state  legislatures,  and 
the  resistance  in  the  three  others  scarcely  maintains  its 

1  James  Thomson  Callender.     See  N.  E.  Hist.  Gen.  Register,  1896-97;  Henry 
Adams,   History,   I.   322. 


8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1802 

ground.  In  both  Houses  of  Congress  the  majority  is  already 
decisive,  but  at  the  ensuing  Congress  will  be  much  greater. 
The  division  in  the  Senate  is  now  nearly  equal,  but  for  the 
next  two  years  there  will  be  nearly  two-thirds  of  the  partisans 
of  the  present  government.  In  the  State  of  Pennsylvania 
their  ascendency  is  so  great  that  the  federalists  have  scarcely 
dared  to  name  a  candidate  in  opposition  to  Governor 
M'Kean's  reelection.  Federalism  is,  indeed,  in  that  state  so 
completely  palsied,  that  scarce  a  trace  of  it  is  to  be  discov- 
ered, except  in  here  and  there  a  newspaper  edited  by  New 
Englandmen. 

This  party  triumph  is  not  enjoyed  with  moderation.  The 
basis  of  it  all  is  democratic  popularity,  and  the  leaders  are  all 
sensible  how  sandy  a  foundation  it  is.  Strong  as  the  fabric 
of  their  power  appears,  they  are  constantly  trembling  lest  its 
corner  stones  should  fail,  and  as  their  principal  alarm  is  lest 
the  old  administration  should  recover  favor  in  the  eyes  of  the 
people,  the  great  engine  of  party  with  which  they  endeavor 
to  fortify  themselves  is  slander  upon  their  predecessors.  This 
they  continue  under  every  shape  and  on  all  occasions.  Nor 
are  these  exertions  unsuccessful.  They  carried  the  system  to 
such  a  pitch  that  even  a  committee  of  the  national  House  of 
Representatives,  called  a  Committee  of  Investigation,  at  the 
close  of  the  session  made  a  report,  the  manner  and  form  of 
which  were  both  highly  exceptionable  to  every  maxim  of 
common  justice  and  honor.  This  report  was  hurried  through 
the  House  with  as  little  regard  to  decorum  as  it  was  made. 
It  has  since  been  analyzed  and  refuted  by  several  publica- 
tions in  various  parts  of  the  Union,  but  most  effectually  by  a 
pamphlet  of  Mr.  Wolcott,  which  will  doubtless  be  sent  you 
by  some  of  your  friends,  and  which  will  show  you  a  fair  speci- 
men both  of  our  administration  and  its  opposition.1 

1  Address  to  the  People  on  the  Report  of  a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Representatives, 


i8o2]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  9 

The  concern  of  the  republicans,  as  they  style  themselves, 
is  the  result  of  consciousness  rather  than  of  real  danger.  The 
power  of  the  administration  rests  upon  the  support  of  a  much 
stronger  majority  of  the  people  throughout  the  Union  than 
the  former  administrations  ever  possessed  since  the  first 
establishment  of  the  Constitution.  Whatever  the  merits  or 
dements  of  the  former  administrations  may  have  been, 
there  never  was  a  system  of  measures  more  completely  and 
irrevocably  abandoned  and  rejected  by  the  popular  voice. 
It  never  can  and  never  will  be  revived.  The  experiment,  such 
as  it  was,  has  failed,  and  to  attempt  its  restoration  would  be 
as  absurd  as  to  undertake  the  resurrection  of  a  carcase  seven 
years  in  its  grave.  The  alarm  of  the  pilots  at  the  helm  is 
therefore  without  cause.  What  they  take  for  breakers  are 
mere  clouds  of  unsubstantial  vapor.  The  only  risk  to  which 
they  are  exposed  is  the  shallowness  of  their  waters.  Their 
system  is  so  short-sighted  and  so  contracted,  that  it  will 
never  stand  a  popular  test  even  of  twelve  years,  and  the 
people,  whom  almost  unbounded  prosperity  could  not  attach 
to  their  predecessors,  will  not  learn  from  adversity  to  be 
better  pleased  with  them. 

The  yellow  fever  made  its  appearance  at  an  earlier  period 
than  usual  in  many  of  our  cities.  It  has  not  hitherto  spread 
so  extensively  as  upon  former  occasions,  but  it  has  been  as 
malignant  in  the  cases  which  have  happened  as  it  was  ever 
known.  A  dysentery  of  extreme  violence  has  likewise  pre- 
vailed in  the  western  parts  of  this  Commonwealth  and  the 
neighboring  part  of  Connecticut.  The  approach  of  the  win- 
ter season  gives  us  hopes  of  relief  from  these  scourges.  But 
the  summer  has  been  so  long  protracted  that,  at  the  moment 
I  write  this,  Fahrenheit's  thermometer  stands  at  82,  and  has 

to  Examine  and  Report  whether  Monies  have  been  Applied  to  the  Objects  for  which 
they  were  appropriated.    Boston  and  Hartford,  1802. 


io  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1802 

been  higher  in  the  course  of  the  day.    The  harvests  through- 
out the  country  have  been  plentiful. 
I  am,  &c. 

ECCE  ITERUM  * 

1801,  September,  I  returned  from  a  series  of  diplomatic 
missions  in  Europe,  which  had  kept  me  seven  years  absent 
from  my  country.     Mr.  Jefferson  had  just  ascended  the 
presidential  chair.     In  December  I  resumed  my  residence 
in  Boston,  and  became  again  a  candidate  for  practice  at  the 
bar. 

1802,  April,  I  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Senate  of 
Massachusetts,  in  which  capacity  I  served  a  single  year.    It 
was  the  noviciate  of  my  legislative  labors,  during  which  I 
was  not  able  either  to  effect  much  good,  or  to  prevent  much 
evil.     I  attempted  some  reforms,  and  aspired  to  check  some 
abuses,  I  regret  to  say  with  little  success.    I  wanted  the  au- 
thority of  experience,  and  I  discovered  the  danger  of  oppos- 
ing and  of  exposing  corruption.    I  witnessed  the  process  of  a 
bank  manufactory,  not  unlike  that  of  the  Chemical  Bank,2 
which  has  so  recently  edified  the  public  ear  at  Albany.     I 
resisted  it  in  vain.     The  mammon  of  unrighteousness  was 
too  strongly  befriended. 

In  November  of  this  year  I  was  run  as  a  candidate  for  the 
House  of  Representatives  of  the  United  States,  in  opposition 
to  Dr.  Eustis.3  I  had  a  majority  of  votes  in  Boston;  but  two 
or  three  neighboring  towns  annexed  to  the  Congressional 
district  and  a  rainy  day  lost  me  the  election  by  forty  or  fifty 
votes. 

1  Written  about  1825. 

2  Chartered  in  New  York  in  1825. 

3  The  Memoirs  should  be  read  in  connection  with  this  paper. 


i8o2]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  11 

During  the  year  1802  I  delivered  two  orations,  which 
formed  no  inconsiderable  incidents  in  the  history  of  my  life. 
The  first  was  in  May,  an  Address  to  the  Massachusetts 
Charitable  Fire  Society;  l  the  second,  at  Plymouth,  on  the 
22d  of  December,  at  the  festival  of  the  Pilgrims.2  The  ad- 
dress to  the  Fire  Society  has  contributed  to  rebuild  the  city 
of  Boston,  to  convert  stubble  into  brick,  clapboards  and 
shingles  into  granite  walls.  It  implored  and  shamed  the  Bos- 
tonians  out  of  their  inveterate  fondness  for  wooden  houses. 
If  you  will  know  the  good  that  I  have  done,  set  this  down  for 
one  of  the  best  deeds  of  my  life.  In  the  Plymouth  discourse, 
there  is  a  brief  argument  upon  the  right  of  Europeans  to  form 
establishments  in  the  American  wilderness,  and  to  extinguish 
upon  just  and  reasonable  terms  all  the  natural  rights  of  the 
aboriginal  Indians  conflicting  with  it,  which  was  afterward 
useful  to  me  at  Ghent,  and  which  after  the  lapse  of  more 
than  twenty  years  I  still  think  unanswerable.3 

1  An  Address  to  the  Members  of  the  Massachusetts  Charitable  Fire  Society,  May  28, 
1802.     Boston:  1802. 

2  An  Oration  Delivered  at  Plymouth,  December  22,  1802.    Boston:  1802. 

3  He  was  elected  to  the  United  States  Senate,  February  3,  1803.    See  Memoirs, 
and  New  England  Federalism,  154.    "A  great  bank  in  Boston,  of  twelve  hundred 
thousand  dollars,  is  now  in  debate  in  the  Senate,  having  passed  the  House.    It  is 
supported  by  the  principal  moneyed  men  in  this  town,  and  opposed  by  John  Q. 
Adams,  whose  popularity  is  lessened  by  it.    They  say  also  he  is  too  unmanageable. 
Yet  he  is  chosen  Senator  to  Congress  in  consequence  of  a  caucus  pact,  that  if  Col. 
Pickering  should  not  be  elected  on  two  trials,  then  the  Feds  would  combine  and  vote 
for  J.  Q.  A.    This  happened  accordingly."   Fisher  Ames  to  Christopher  Gore,  Febru- 
ary 24,  1803.    Works  of  Fisher  Ames,  I.  321. 


12  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1803 

TO  HENRY  KNOX 

BOSTON,   14  February,  1803. 

I  o'clock,  P.  M. 
DEAR  SIR: 

I  have  but  this  moment  arrived  in  town,  and  upon  reach- 
ing my  house  received  your  favor  of  yesterday.  This  must 
be  my  apology  for  not  having  sooner  answered  it. 

The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  reasons  for  which  I  dissented 
from  the  vote  for  an  address  to  remove  the  two  judges.1 

First.  Because  the  grounds  alleged  in  the  said  address  for  the 
removal  are  for  official  misdemeanors;  and  the  subscriber  con- 
ceives it  to  be  the  intention  of  the  Constitution,  that  no  judicial 
officer  should  be  removed  from  office,  by  the  mode  of  an  address  of 
the  two  houses,  on  the  ground  of  offences,  for  the  trial  of  which  the 
Constitution  has  expressly  provided  the  mode  of  impeachment. 

Secondly.  Because  he  considers  the  independence  of  the  judi- 
ciary as  materially  affected,  by  a  mode  of  proceeding  which  in  its 
effects  must  make  the  tenure  of  all  judicial  offices  dependent  upon 
the  verdict  of  a  jury  in  any  one  county  of  the  Commonwealth. 

Thirdly.  Because  the  decision  of  the  Senate  in  this  case,  affecting 
in  the  highest  degree  the  rights^  the  character  and  reputation  of 
two  individuals,  citizens  of  this  Commonwealth,  ought  not  to 
have  been  taken,  without  giving  them  an  opportunity  previously 
to  be  heard  in  their  own  defence. 

I  am  with  the  highest  respect,  etc. 

1  Paul  Dudley  §argent  and  William  Vinal,  justices  of  the  Common  Pleas,  Han- 
cock county.    See  Adams,  Memoirs,  February  10,  12,  and  March  4,  1803. 


i8o3]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  13 

TO  ROBERT  BIRD  1 

BOSTON,  27  April,   1803. 
SIR: 

I  have  received  your  favor  of  the  12  and  15  April,  inclosing 
a  copy  of  resolutions  agreed  upon  I  March,  by  the  creditors 
of  Messrs.  Bird,  Savage  and  Bird  in  London.  I  have  also 
received  letters  from  them  requesting  me  to  sign  the  letter 
of  license  at  New  York.  Mr.  King,  Mr.  Gore  and  Mr. 
Samuel  Williams  agreed  to  take  up  for  my  honor  all  the  ac- 
cepted bills  drawn  by  me,  excepting  the  one  for  £400  which 
had  been  sent  back  protested,  before  they  knew  I  had  drawn 
upon  the  house.  Mr.  Williams  advanced  the  money,  and  by 
his  letters  calls  upon  me  for  the  reimbursement  of  £2802:10 
sterling  thus  paid  for  me,  with  about  £70  more  charges  of 
protest,  commission,  etc.  In  return  for  an  act  of  kindness  so 
important  to  me  I  cannot  hesitate  to  make  immediate  re- 
mittance to  Mr.  Williams,  and  to  effect  that  am  obliged 
to  make  sacrifices  of  property  to  raise  the  money,  which, 
though  much  less  than  they  would  have  been  with  the  ag- 
gravation of  protested  bills  and  their  load  of  charges,  are 
still  of  very  serious  concern  to  me. 

Under  these  circumstances,  sir,  upon  being  asked  to  sign 
a  letter  of  license  for  three  years,  I  have  some  reason  to  ex- 

1  On  April  i,  notice  had  been  received  of  the  failure  of  the  banking  house  of  Bird, 
Savage  and  Bird,  which  had  acted  as  fiscal  agents  of  the  United  States  in  London, 
and  had  on  deposit  the  funds  coming  to  John  Adams  arising  from  the  redemption  of 
United  States  loans  in  Holland,  to  which  he  had  subscribed  to  inspire  confidence. 
Bills  on  London  had  been  drawn  by  John  Quincy  Adams  but  were  returned  protested 
and  he  was  forced  to  sell  a  part  of  his  property  to  meet  them.  Rufus  King,  Christo- 
pher Gore  and  Samuel  Williams  in  London,  and  Benjamin  Pickman  in  Boston  gave 
him  assistance  and  the  bankers  eventually  paid  their  indebtedness;  but  the  last  in- 
stalment was  not  received  until  after  the  death  of  John  Adams,  twenty-three  years 
later.  See  Adams,  Memoirs,  April  I,  1803. 


i4  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1803 

pect  that  something  should  be  alleged  as  the  inducement. 
Still  more  reason  have  I  to  expect  a  more  particular  state- 
ment of  the  assignment  made  by  you  of  £75,000  sterling  of 
the  House's  property  to  cover  your  own  debts.  I  wish  there- 
fore for  some  further  explanation  on  this  point,  and  some 
satisfactory  evidence  that  the  assignment,  which  you  coolly 
tell  me  "  stands  good  against  every  act  that  can  be  done 
against  it,"  is  justifiable  not  only  upon  legal  grounds,  but 
on  such  principles  that  the  unsecured  and  disregarded  cred- 
itors of  the  House  may  have  an  apology  for  acquiescing  in  it; 
and,  after  being  informed  of  it,  still  to  grant  a  letter  of  license 
and  £800  sterling  a  year  to  each  of  the  partners  in  England 
for  collecting  a  remnant  of  probably  desperate  debts.  I  ask 
therefore : 

1.  Whether  the  assignment  of  £75,000  property,  which 
you  consider  yourself  as  having  so  effectually  made,  is  or  is 
not  a  part  of  that  property  which  the  house  in  London,  on  the 
1st  of  March,  stated  to  their  creditors  there  as  effects  re- 
sponsible for  their  debts? 

2.  If  so:  whether  the  creditors  in  London,  when  they 
agreed  to  the  letter  of  license,  knew  of  this  assignment  made 
by  you  ? 

3.  Whether  there  is  any  prospect  that  those  creditors  will 
not  consider  as  void  their  letter  of  license,  when  they  come  to 
be  informed  of  this  enormous  deduction  from  the  house's 
ostensible  effects? 

4.  What  shipments  those  are  which  you  say  you  made  to 
aid  the  credit  of  the  house?    When  they  were  made?    Had 
they  been  received  and  disposed  of  by  the  house  in  London 
before  the  7th  of  February,  or  were  they  to  arrive  after  that 
period?     What  goods  were  they,  and  to  what  amount  will 
they  probably  ever  be  effects  to  satisfy  the  creditors  of  the 
house  in  England? 


i8o3]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  15 

Until  these  questions  can  be  satisfactorily  answered  I  see 
no  possible  excuse  to  myself  for  assenting  to  the  letter  of  li- 
cense. The  house  in  England  write  me,  indeed,  that  it  is 
the  only  possible  way  of  rendering  their  estate  solvent;  but 
why  it  should  have  that  tendency  more  than  a  mode  of  pro- 
ceeding which  will  leave  the  creditors  in  general  free  to  con- 
test partial  conveyances  and  assignments  confessedly  made 
in  contemplation  of  failure  as  well  as  all  existing  attachments, 
I  do  not  clearly  see.  If  you  can  explain  it  to  me,  sir,  I  shall 
have  no  disposition  to  treat  you  or  the  house  with  severity; 
however  severely  they  have  treated  me. 

I  am,  &c. 


TO  WILLIAM  BARTLETT 

BOSTON,  13  May,  1803. 
SIR: 

•  •••••• 

You  will  see  what  answers  he  *  makes  to  these  questions, 
and  will  judge  for  yourself  concerning  them.  My  impres- 
sions are  these: 

1.  That  his  aversion,  and  that  of  his  partners  in  England, 
to  going  through  a  commission  of  bankruptcy  is,  because 
they  wish  not  to  have  the  validity  of  their  conveyances 
undergo  a  trial. 

2.  That  those  of  their  creditors,  whom  they  have  at- 
tempted to  secure  by  these  conveyances,  have  the  same  de- 
sire to  establish  their  validity,  and  of  course  would  be  ready 
enough  to  sign  a  letter  of  license. 

3.  That  probably  the  persons  who  are  willing  to  become 
bail  for  Robert  Bird  to  any  amount  are  those  very  creditors, 

1  Robert  Bird. 


16  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1803 

whom  he  has  endeavored  to  secure,  and  who  therefore  wish 
to  keep  off  a  commission  of  bankruptcy. 

4.  But  that  for  these  very  reasons  the  unsecured  creditors 
like  you  and  me  ought  not  to  consent  to  the  letter  of  license. 
I  see  no  possible  benefit  that  we  can  derive  from  leaving  the 
management  of  their  affairs  in  their  own  hands,  and  all  the 
business  to  be  transacted  in  England.  On  the  contrary  I 
think  we  ought  to  insist  upon  a  judicial  trial  of  the  force  of 
their  partial  conveyances,  and  the  most  advantageous  way 
of  doing  that  will  be  by  a  commission  of  bankruptcy.  For 
then  the  assignee  under  the  commission  would  try  the  ques- 
tion at  the  expense  of  their  estate,  as  it  ought  to  be  tried,  and 
not  at  the  cost  of  you  or  me,  single  individual  creditors,  and 
additional  aggravations  to  our  losses. 

If  you  concur  in  opinion  with  me  as  at  present  advised,  we 
shall  not  sign  the  letter  of  license,  and  we  shall  instruct 
Mr.  Williams  not  to  sign  it  for  us  in  England;  unless,  which 
I  now  deem  next  to  impossible,  he  should  see  a  fair  prospect  of 
a  speedy  and  considerable  dividend. 

We  shall  as  soon  as  possible  get  a  commission  of  bank- 
ruptcy at  New  York  against  Bird,  Savage  and  Bird,  and 
under  that  commission  try  the  validity  both  of  Robert 
Bird's  partial  conveyances,  and  of  those  made  by  the  house 
in  London,  at  least  so  far  as  relates  to  debts  due  them  here 
in  the  United  States.  For  you  will  remark  that  in  one  in- 
stance at  least,  the  house  in  London  have  made  a  conveyance 
to  one  set  of  favored  creditors,  of  the  very  same  property 
which  Robert  Bird  has  attempted  to  convey  to  another.  It 
is  obvious  that  both  these  conveyances  cannot  stand;  I  hope 
that  both  will  fall,  and  that  whatever  is  recoverable  will  go  to 
satisfy  the  creditors  proportionably. 

Please  to  return  me  the  inclosed  letter  as  soon  as  possible, 
and  let  me  know  your  sentiments  concerning  it.  I  shall 


i8o3]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  17 

write  further  to  Robert  Bird  and  get  a  list  of  his  unsecured 
creditors,  whose  interest  is  the  same  with  your's  and  mine, 
that  we  may  act  in  concert  and  endeavor  to  agree  upon  com- 
mon measures. 
I  am,  &c. 

TO  ROBERT  BIRD 

BOSTON,  13  May,  1803. 
SIR: 

I  have  received  your  favor  of  the  5th  instant,  the  contents 
of  which  are  not  perfectly  intelligible  to  me,  but  which  has 
in  some  respects  answered  the  questions  contained  in  my 
letter  of  27  April.  I  have  now  to  request  information,  when 
your  creditors  will  be  called  together  at  New  York  to  deter- 
mine what  they  will  do,  as  to  the  letter  of  license  agreed  to 
by  some  of  the  creditors  in  England.  It  is  my  intention,  if 
possible,  to  be  present  at  that  meeting.  I  have  also  to  re- 
quest of  you  information  on  the  following  points: 

1.  Whether   there  were   any  other  partners,   general   or 
special,  to  the  house  in  England,  excepting  yourself  your 
brother  Henry,  and  Mr.  Savage?    And  if  there  were  any  such 
other  partners  who  were  they? 

2.  Who  were  the  persons  constituting  the  firm  of  Robert 
Bird  and  Company  at  New  York?     Please  to  name  every 
person  included  in  this  partnership. 

3.  I  will  thank  you  for  a  list  of  your  creditors  in  the  United 
States,  distinguishing  the  creditors  of  Bird,  Savage  and  Bird 
from  those  of  Robert  Bird  and  Company,  and  specifying 
those  whom  you  consider  as  secured  by  your  assignment  to 
Mr.  Harrison,  from  those  who  have  no  security  at  all. 

4.  At  whose  suit  besides  that  of  the  United  States  are  you 
now  under  bail,  and  who  is  that  bail?    You  say  that  you  can 


i8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1803 

find  protection  so  far  as  bail  goes  for  any  suit  which  may  be 
commenced  against  you;  I  wish  therefore  to  be  informed  who 
gives  that  protection,  and  particularly  whether  any  of  the 
creditors  for  whose  benefit  you  made  the  assignment  to 
Mr.  Harrison  are  of  the  number? 

I  presume,  sir,  that  you  will  not  consider  any  of  these 
questions  improper,  that  you  will  think  them  all  entitled  to 
clear  and  explicit  answers,  and  that  you  will  favor  me  with 
such  an  answer  as  soon  as  possible. 

You  are  sensible  it  must  be  my  very  sincere  and  cordial 
wish,  that  your  opinion  and  that  of  your  partners  in  England, 
so  confidently  expressed,  with  regard  to  your  ultimate  com- 
plete solvency  may  prove  well  founded.  But  my  confidence 
in  vour  assurances  would  I  confess  be  more  unshaken,  did  I 

*  / 

not  perceive  the  extreme  variance  between  your  statement 
here,  and  that  of  your  partners  there.  When  I  find  you 
adding  above  250,000  dollars  to  what  they  call  the  sum  total 
of  their  debts,  and  deducting  £75,000  sterling  from  what  they 
exhibited  as  effects;  when  I  see  them  exhibiting  you  as  debtor 
to  them  for  nearly  £20,000  sterling,  and  you  conveying  away 
their  effects  to  the  amount  of  £75,000  more,  my  only  aston- 
ishment is  that  you,  aware  of  these  facts,  should  still  be 
talking  to  your  creditors  about  paying  them  all,  and  having 
a  large  surplus  left.  For  my  own  part,  I  should  consider  an 
impartial  and  candid  equalization  of  regard  for  the  interests 
of  all  your  creditors  in  their  just  proportions  as  more  credit- 
able to  you  personally,  and  more  conformable  to  the  dictates 
of  justice,  than  a  stubborn  adherence  to  a  system  of  favorit- 
ism in  your  payments,  colored  only  to  the  other  creditors 
by  the  notoriously  groundless  pretence  of  paying  them  all. 

It  is  still  in  your  power,  sir,  to  manifest  that  equal  regard 
to  all  your  creditors,  and  I  hope  that  upon  reflection  you  will 
think  it  advisable  to  adopt  that  course.  When  I  have 


i8o3]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  19 

reason  to  believe  you  have  adopted  it,  you  shall  not  find  me 
disposed  to  utter  an  expression  which  can  wound  your  feel- 
ings, or  take  a  measure  that  can  bear  hard  upon  your  char- 
acter or  interest.  I  am,  &C.1 


RESOLUTION  ON  BOUNDARIES 

[November,  1803.] 

Resolved,  two  thirds  of  the  Senators  present  concurring  therein, 
that  they  do  consent  to  and  advise  the  President  of  the  United 
States  to  ratify  the  Convention  between  the  United  States  of 
America  and  his  Britannic  Majesty  for  determining  boundaries 
pursuant  to  the  provisions  contained  in  the  Treaty  of  Peace  of 
1783,  concluded  at  London  on  the  I2th  of  May,  1803,  on  condition 
that  at  the  exchange  of  ratifications  it  shall  be  declared  by  the 
people  authorized  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  to  make  the 
said  exchange,  that  it  is  understood  that  nothing  in  the  said  Con- 
vention contained  shall  in  any  manner  affect  or  impair  any  right 
or  claim  to  territory  which  the  United  States  may  possess,  by 
virtue  of  the  Treaty  between  the  United  States  and  the  French 
Republic,  concluded  at  Paris  on  the  3Oth  of  April,  i8o3.2 

RESOLUTION  ON  TREATY  WITH  FRANCE 

November  25,  1803. 
On  motion,  by  Mr.  Adams,  that  it  be 
Resolved,  that  a  committee  of  members  be  appointed 

1  The  President  called  the  Senate  to  assemble  October  17,  and  Adams  set  out  for 
Washington  October  I,  but  was  delayed  on  the  journey  by  an  accidental  illness  in 
his  family,  and  reached  the  capital  city  four  days  late.    On  entering  the  city  he 
passed  the  Secretary  of  the  Senate  (Otis),  who  was  taking  to  the  President  the 
Senate's  advice  and  consent  to  the  ratification  of  the  treaty  with  France  ceding 
Louisiana  to  the  United  States.    Adams  would  have  voted  in  its  favor  had  he  been 
present.     Adams,  New  England  Federalism,  53. 

2  See  Adams,  Memoirs,  November  15,  1803. 


20  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1803 

to  enquire  whether  any,  and  if  any,  what  further  measures  may 
be  necessary,  for  carrying  into  effect  the  treaty  between  the 
United  States  and  the  French  Republic,  concluded  at  Paris  on 
the  3<Dth  April,  1803,  whereby  Louisiana  was  ceded  to  the  United 
States;  which  committee  may  report  by  bill  or  otherwise. 
Ordered,  That  this  motion  be  for  consideration.1 


AMENDMENT  TO  THE  CONSTITUTION 

[November  25,  1803.] 

Resolved,  by  the  Senate  and  House  of  Representatives  of  the 
United  States,  two  thirds  of  both  Houses  concurring,  that  the 
following  amendment  to  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States 
be  proposed  to  the  legislatures  of  the  several  States;  which,  when 
adopted  and  ratified  by  three-fourths  of  the  said  legislatures,  shall 
be  valid  to  all  intents  and  purposes  as  a  part  of  the  said  Constitu- 
tion. 

Congress  shall  have  power,  at  such  times  and  in  such  manner  as 

1  Senate  Journal,  8th  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  68.    See  also  New  England  Federalism,  155. 

"The  speech  of  Mr.  John  Q.  Adams,  son  of  the  late  President,  is  peculiarly  grati- 
fying; he  is  an  eastern  man,  as  may  be  supposed  not  much  in  love  with  Mr.  Jeffer- 
son, yet  he  tells  us  the  acquisition  of  Louisiana  is  an  event  of  such  great  importance 
that  to  be  able  to  fulfil  the  treaty  an  amendment  of  the  constitution  ought  to  be 
made,  if  necessary,  and  he  declared  his  belief  that  every  state  in  the  union  would  be  in 
favor  of  it.  This  cannot  be  called  democratic  cant  or  such  like,  it  is  the  language  of 
the  son  of  Mr.  Adams,  and  probably  such  as  our  late  President  himself  would  ex- 
press. Again,  speaking  of  the  acquisition,  he  said: 

'  '  I  consider  the  object  as  of  the  highest  advantage  to  us:  and  the  gentleman  from  Ken- 
tucky himself,  who  has  displayed  with  so  much  eloquence  the  immense  importance  to 
this  union  of  the  possession  of  the  ceded  country,  cannot  carry  his  idea  further  on  that 
subject  than  I  do.y 

"Such  language,  we  repeat,  is  gratifying,  coming  from  a  high  New  England  fed- 
eralist, it  will  have  more  weight  than  columns  of  the  declamation  of  the  Essex-junto. 
Already  have  such  sentiments  expressed  by  such  men  silenced  some  of  the  disaf- 
fected, and  we  hope  to  find  even  among  federalists  no  opposers  to  what  the  well  in- 
formed of  the  party  have  so  emphatically  asserted."  Aurora.  December  [  1,1803. 

The  speech  was  republished  in  the  Independent  Chronicle,  December  15,  1803. 


i8o3]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  21 

they  may  deem  expedient,  to  incorporate  within  the  Union,  the 
inhabitants  of  all  such  territories,  heretofore  not  within  the  limits 
of  the  United  States,  as  have  been  or  may  be  ceded  by  treaty, 
duly  ratified,  to  the  United  States;  and  to  extend  to  the  said  in- 
habitants all  the  rights,  privileges  and  immunities  which  are  en- 
joyed by  native  citizens  of  the  United  States  under  the  Constitu- 
tion. And  Congress  shall  also  have  power  to  make  all  such  laws 
for  the  government  of  such  ceded  territories,  and  of  their  inhab- 
itants as  may  be  necessary  to  fulfil  with  good  faith  the  conditions 
of  cession,  and  as  may  best  conciliate  the  protection  of  the  liberties, 
property  and  religion  of  the  said  inhabitants  with  the  rights  of  the 
United  States,  of  their  citizens,  and  of  the  respective  States,  under 
the  Constitution.1 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
QAMES  MADISON] 

WASHINGTON,  December  [3?],   1803. 
SIR: 

Some  difficulty  having  arisen  in  the  Senate,  in  considering 
the  expediency  of  advising  and  consenting  to  the  ratification 
of  the  Treaty  of  limits,  between  the  United  States  and  Great 
Britain,  signed  on  the  I2th  of  May,  1803,  a  committee  of  that 

1  New  England  Federalism,  157.  Adams  there  gives  a  summary  of  his  speech  and 
the  action  which  was  taken  subsequently.  In  the  same  work  he  shows  the  effect  of 
the  Louisiana  purchase  upon  the  federalists  of  the  Essex-junto  following.  See 
especially  p.  52. 

"Mr.  Adams  had  not  arrived  when  the  treaty  [for  purchase  of  Louisiana]  was 
ratified,  but  he  approved  of  it  and  of  the  consequent  appropriation  for  the  purchase- 
money;  fondly  believing  that  an  amendment  to  the  Constitution,  to  embrace  that 
new  object,  would  have  been  a  mighty  easy  thing.  He  presented  a  resolution  really 
for  that  purpose;  but  after  lying  some  time,  it  was  called  up  and  was  contemp- 
tuously rejected;  his  own,  Mr.  Hillhouse's  and  mine  being  the  only  votes  in  its 
favor."  Pickering  to  Rufus  King,  March  3,  1804,  Life  and  Correspondence  of  Rufus 
King,  IV.  361. 


22  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1803 

body  has  been  appointed  to  inquire  and  report  upon  the 
subject. 

The  difficulty  arises  from  the  circumstance  that  the 
Treaty  with  the  French  republic,  containing  the  cession  of 
Louisiana,  was  signed  on  the  joth  of  April,  twelve  days  earlier 
than  that  with  Great  Britain,  and  some  apprehension  is 
entertained  that  the  boundary  line  contemplated  in  the  third 
article  of  the  latter,  may  by  a  possible  future  construction 
be  pretended  to  operate  as  a  limitation  to  the  claims  of  terri- 
tory acquired  by  the  United  States  in  the  former  of  these  in- 
struments. 

But  as  the  ratification,  if  it  can  be  effected,  without  un- 
necessary delay  is  a  desirable  object,  it  has  occurred  to  the 
committee  that  Mr.  King  may  possibly  have  it  in  his  power 
to  give  information  which  might  remove  the  obstacle;  I  have, 
therefore,  in  behalf  of  the  committee,  to  ask  whether  from 
any  information  in  possession  of  your  Department,  or  which 
may  be  obtained,  in  such  manner  as  you  may  deem  ex- 
pedient, it  can  be  ascertained  whether  the  third  article  of 
the  treaty  with  Great  Britain  was  concluded  with  any  ref- 
erence whatsoever  to  that  with  the  French  Republic,  or  with 
any  right  or  claim  which  the  United  States  have  acquired  by 
it.  I  am,  etc.1 

1  Madison  sent  this  letter  to  Rufus  King,  who  replied  that  the  "convention  was 
concluded  without  any  reference  whatsoever  to  the  treaty  of  cession  with  France." 
Life  and  Correspondence  of  Rufus  King,  IV.  332. 

"The  Hon.  John  Quincy  Adams  will  certainly  be  denounced  and  excommuni- 
cated by  his  party.  On  the  leadings  questions  in  the  Senate  he  has  acted  and  voted 
with  the  friends  of  the  administration.  On  the  resolution  for  carrying  into  effect 
the  Convention  with  France  for  the  purchase  of  Louisiana,  he  delivered  a  concise, 
nervous,  manly,  energetic,  and  unequivocal  eulogy  on  the  measure."  Worcester 
(Mass.)  Mgis,  December  4,  1803. 

"The  motive  of  Mr.  Adams  in  submitting  the  above  resolution  [on  Louisiana, 
November  25]  is  by  him  declared  to  be,  that  the  Constitution  should  be  so  amended 
as  to  extend  its  protection  over  the  territory  of  Louisiana,  that  the  inhabitants 


i8o3]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  23 

TO  BENJAMIN  RUSSELL 

WASHINGTON,  24  December,  1803. 
SIR: 

In  the  Centinel  of  the  loth  instant  is  published  a  letter  to 
the  editor,1  containing  certain  animadversions  upon,  and 
anticipations  of  my  conduct,  respecting  the  two  subjects  of 
the  highest  public  importance  which  have  been  agitated  in 

thereof  may  be  immediately  admitted  into  the  Union  and  enjoy  all  the  rights  and 
immunities  of  citizens  of  the  United  States!!  ,  .  .  The  proposed  Amendment  of  the 
Constitution  for  designating  the  votes  of  President  and  Vice  President  labors 
heavily  in  the  Senate.  Two  of  its  members  are  absent,  and  it  takes  twenty-three  to 
make  the  constitutional  two-thirds.  Mr.  Butler  (of  South  Carolina)  a  democrat, 
but  who  was  a  member  of  the  Convention  which  formed  the  Constitution,  and  who 
knows  the  wisdom  in  which  the  provision  was  formed  is  opposed  to  the  amendment; 
but  to  balance  this,  I  am  told  Mr.  Adams,  from  your  state  will  advocate  with  zeal 
the  amendment!!!  But  for  this,  those  who  count  numbers  say,  there  would  not  be 
a  constitutional  majority  for  the  proposition."  Columbian  Centinel,  December  10, 
1803. 

1  "I  have  seen  the  National  Intelligencer  for  a  few  weeks  past.  I  there  read  the 
debate  which  I  presume  wras  the  cause  of  Mr.  Eustis  writing  to  Mr.  Joseph  Hall  the 
following:  'You  will  probably  have  heard  of  the  bold  and  independent  manner  in 
which  J.  Q.  A.  voted  away  from  his  party.  Having  gained  credit  with  us,  it  is  to  be 
expected  he  will  proportionably  lose  with  them.'  When  I  wrote  you  last  Sunday 
I  did  not  mention  this  in  my  letter.  I  only  observed  that  I  was  sure  you  would  as 
much  as  possible  keep  your  mind  free  from  party  influence,  and  vote  as  your  con- 
science aided  by  your  judgment  should  dictate;  and  though  upon  some  occasions 
I  might  think  your  vote  would  have  been  different,  it  is  impossible  to  judge  accur- 
ately, because  we  see  not  the  causes  which  have  operated  towards  the  decision.  I 
did  not,  however,  so  soon  expect  to  see  Dr.  Eustis'  observation  verified.  You  will 
read  in  Ben  Russell's  Centinel  of  Saturday  the  loth  an  extract  of  a  letter  from 
Washington  to  the  Editor.  Who  the  writer  is,  I  know  not;  but  the  letter  is  evidently 
intended  to  convey  an  idea  that  you  were  attaching  yourself  to  the  majority,  and 
with  the  notes  of  admiration  and  the  Latin  quotation  (I  do  not  like  this)  stabbing 
in  the  dark,  which  Russell  publishes,  but  takes  care  to  omit  the  debate  which  gave 
occasion  to  the  motion.  You  will  proceed  in  a  consistent  uniform  (tenor  of  conduct) 
regardless  of  the  goads  and  stings  you  will  have  to  encounter."  Abigail  Adams  to 
John  Quincy  Adams,  December  n,  1803.  Ms. 


24  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1803 

Congress  this  session.  To  the  remarks  respecting  me  which 
may  appear  in  newspapers  of  some  descriptions  I  should  pay 
little  attention.  To  those  which  appear  in  the  Centinel,  when 
of  the  nature  of  those  to  which  I  allude,  some  notice,  in  jus- 
tice not  only  to  myself  but  to  my  constituents,  is  due. 

In  the  present  instance  as  I  believe  neither  the  writer  nor 
the  publisher  of  the  letter  acted  with  views  unfriendly  to  me, 
and  as  I  feel  the  great  importance  of  harmony  between  those 
of  us  who  generally  agree  in  principles  relative  to  public 
measures,  I  am  unwilling  to  give  publicity  to  the  defence 
and  justification  of  myself,  which  the  letter  I  speak  of  seems 
to  call  for.  It  will  be  much  more  agreeable  to  me  to  explain 
myself  amicably  with  the  writer  of  the  letter,  and  arrest  the 
possibility  of  any  public  controversy  upon  the  subject.  I 
now,  therefore,  write  to  request  information  of  you,  who  the 

• 

writer  of  that  letter  or  of  the  part  of  it  respecting  me  was ;  and 
to  desire  particularly  that  you  will  not  refuse  me  his  name 
until  after  consulting  him  upon  the  subject.1  As  I  presume 
it  came  from  no  ordinary  authority,  I  flatter  myself  the 
gentleman  will  readily  consent  to  my  request,  in  which  case 
I  shall  avoid  all  public  notice  of  the  letter.  If,  however,  he 
should  be  unwilling  to  give  his  name,  you  will  be  kind 
enough  to  inform  me  of  his  determination. 

In  asking  this,  I  hope  you  will  not  understand  me  as  in  the 
remotest  degree  wishing  to  restrain  you  in  the  publication  of 
any  observations  upon  my  conduct,  which  you  may  think 
proper  at  any  time.  I  have  the  most  perfect  respect  for  the 
freedom  of  the  press,  and  think  the  true  spirit  of  independ- 
ence best  exerted  in  checking  by  timely  admonition  the  errors 
of  our  friends.  Of  the  value  in  which  I  hold  your  paper 
you  have  had  for  many  years  stronger  proofs  than  any 

1  He  learned  that  the  writer  of  the  letter  was  William  Stedman,  a  member  of  Con- 
gress, who  lodged  in  the  same  house  with  Pickering.     Memoirs,  January  18,  1804. 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  25 

formal   assurances   could   contain,    and    the  object  of   my 
present  request,  I  beg  leave  once  more  to  repeat,  is  the  pres- 
ervation of  harmony  among  those  who  have  already  been 
too  much  weakened  by  its  want. 
I  am,  &c. 

MOTION  ON  IMPEACHMENT 

January  4,  1804. 

On  motion,  by  Mr.  Adams,  that  it  be 

Resolved,  That  any  senator  of  the  United  States,  having  pre- 
viously acted  and  voted  as  a  member  of  the  House  of  Representa- 
tives, on  a  question  of  impeachment,  is  thereby  disqualified  to  sit 
and  act,  in  the  same  case,  as  a  member  of  the  Senate,  sitting  as  a 
court  of  impeachment. 

It  was  agreed  that  this  motion  should  lie  for  consideration.1 

MOTION  ON  TAXATION  OF  LOUISIANA 

January  10,  1804. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Adams,  that  the  following  resolu- 
tions be  adopted,  to  wit: 

Resolved,  That  the  people  of  the  United  States,  have  never, 
in  any  manner  delegated  to  this  Senate,  the  power  of  giving  its 
legislative  concurrence  to  any  act  for  imposing  taxes  upon  the 
inhabitants  of  Louisiana,  without  their  consent. 

Resolved,  That  by  concurring  in  any  act  of  legislation  for  im- 
posing taxes  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Louisiana  without  their  con- 
sent, this  Senate  would  assume  a  power,  unwarranted  by  the  con- 
stitution and  dangerous  to  the  liberties  of  the  people  of  the  United 
States. 

1  Senate  Journal,  8th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  122.  The  motion  was  called  up  March  2, 
and  rejected  by  a  vote  of  twenty  to  eight.  Three  members  of  the  Senate  would  have 
been  disqualified  by  the  motion  had  it  been  adopted.  See  Adams,  Memoirs, 
March  2,  1804. 


26  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

Resolved,  That  the  power  of  originating  bills  for  raising  revenue, 
being  exclusively  vested  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  these 
resolutions  be  carried  to  them  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Senate: 
that  whenever  they  think  proper  they  may  adopt  such  measures 
as  to  their  wisdom  may  appear  necessary  and  expedient  for  raising 
and  collecting  a  revenue  from  Louisiana.1 


NOTES  OF  SPEECH  ON  MOTION 

When  the  resolution  to  appoint  a  committee  for  the  purpose  of 
preparing  a  form  or  forms  of  government  for  Louisiana  was  first 
before  the  Senate,  I  objected  against  it  as  premature.  I  did  not 
think  it  possible  that  during  the  present  session  of  Congress  we 
should  obtain  the  knowledge  or  information  absolutely  necessary 
to  proceed  advisedly  in  a  career  of  such  vast  importance.  It  was 
my  opinion  that  our  first  and  most  urgent  care  should  be  to  obtain 
for  Congress  the  powers  indispensable  for  the  performance  of  our 
own  engagements,  and  that  we  should  have  ample  leisure  for  the  ex- 
ertion of  our  power  over  the  country  we  have  newly  acquired.  To 
perform  what  we  had  promised  was  in  my  view  of  things  the  task 
of  most  immediate  pressure  before  us,  while  we  could  not  wield 
with  too  prudent  and  wary  hand  the  rod  of  empire  and  dominion 
which  we  had  assumed  over  a  foreign  people.  On  both  these 
cardinal  points  of  policy  I  had  the  misfortune  to  find  myself  in  a 
very  small  minority.  The  principles  adopted  by  the  majority  of 
the  Senate  were  in  both  instances  the  reverse  of  those  with  which 
I  concurred.  It  was  said  that  my  anxiety  for  the  fulfilment  of 
our  national  engagements  was  overweaning  and  premature.  That 
it  was  better  policy  to  follow  the  example  which  the  union  had 
exhibited  under  the  old  confederacy  and  break  the  treaty  without 

1  A  vote  was  taken  upon  each  resolution.  The  first  and  second  resolutions  were 
each  rejected  by  a  vote  of  twenty-two  to  four — Adams,  Olcott,  Tracy  and  White 
being  the  four  affirmative  votes.  The  third  resolution  was  then  unanimously  re- 
jected. Senate  Journal,  8th  Cong.,  ist.  Sess.,  130.  Adams,  Memoirs,  January  10, 
1804;  New  England  Federalism,  158. 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  27 

scruple,  until  the  power  with  whom  we  made  it  should  call  us  to 
account  for  the  breach.  But  on  the  other  hand  the  ardor  for  legis- 
lating amply  compensated  for  the  coolness  of  punctuality,  and, 
even  before  we  knew  whether  peaceable  possession  of  the  country 
had  been  obtained,  it  was  judged  not  too  early  to  prepare  forms  of 
government  for  a  people  whose  language  we  do  not  understand, 
whose  manners  opinions  and  prejudices  are  totally  variant  from 
our  own,  and  of  whom  we  know  nothing  more  than  could  be 
collected  from  a  couple  of  small  pamphlets,  compiled  indeed  with 
laudable  industry  and  care  from  the  little  information  our  Execu- 
tive government  had  been  able  in  the  course  of  three  or  four 
months  to  obtain,  but  sent  to  us  with  an  express  caution  not  to 
rely  upon  them  as  official. 

In  both  these  decisions  of  the  Senate  it  was  my  duty  to  acquiesce. 
The  Committee  to  prepare  a  form  or  forms  of  Government  for 
Louisiana  was  appointed  and  their  report  is  now  the  subject  of 
consideration. 


My  first  objection  against  this  bill  is  derived  from  the  principle 
upon  which  I  opposed  the  appointment  of  the  Committee.  If  ever 
there  was  an  occasion  upon  which  a  legislative  assembly  ought  to 
adopt  as  the  basis  of  their  measures  the  old  and  wholesome  adage 
festina  lente,  it  must  surely  be  when  they  are  about  to  undertake 
the  task  which  the  acquisition  of  Louisiana  has  imposed  upon  us. 
In  order  to  impress  our  minds  with  the  full  conviction  of  this  truth, 
let  us  seriously  contemplate  the  extent  and  nature  of  that  task. 
It  is  nothing  less  than  to  accomplish  a  total  revolution,  not  only 
of  government  and  laws,  but  of  the  principles  upon  which  they  are 
founded;  over  a  people  consisting  of  an  hundred  thousand  souls; 
over  a  people  of  whom  we  may  yet  be  said  to  know  nothing,  as 
they  with  still  less  exception  know  nothing  of  us;  over  a  people 
whose  subjection  to  our  authority  has  been  established  without 
their  previous  consent,  and  whose  liberty,  property  and  religion,  we 
are  bound  by  solemn  obligation  to  protect. 

In  order  to  effect  this  revolution  without  violence  and  oppression, 


28  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

it  must  be  done  by  slow,  gradual  and  well  considered  measures;  and 
it  is  of  primary  importance  to  lay  the  foundations  upon  proper 
principles.  The  first  step  we  should  take,  therefore,  seems  to  be, 
that  of  legitimating  our  authority  of  acquiring  the  right  to  make 
laws  for  that  people  at  all.  By  the  treaty  with  France  we  have 
acquired  all  the  rights  of  sovereignty  over  the  inhabitants  of 
Louisiana  which  France  could  impart;  but  as,  to  use  the  language 
of  our  declaration  of  independence,  the  just  powers  of  a  govern- 
ment can  be  derived  only  from  the  consent  of  the  governed,  the 
French  Republic  could  not  give  us  the  right  to  make  laws  for  the 
people  of  Louisiana,  without  their  acquiescence  in  the  transfer. 
I  never  considered  this  as  an  objection  against  the  ratification  of 
the  treaty,  because  I  did  not  deem  it  indispensable  that  this  con- 
sent of  the  ceded  people  should  precede  the  conclusion  of  the  com- 
pact. That  would  indeed  have  been  the  most  natural  and  most 
eligible  course  of  proceeding,  had  it  been  practicable,  and  such  was 
the  opinion  of  our  own  executive  before  the  negotiation  of  the 
treaty.  But  theoretic  principles  of  government  can  never  be 
carried  into  practice  to  their  full  extent.  They  must  be  modified 
and  accommodated  to  the  situations  and  circumstances  of  human 
events  and  human  concerns.  But  between  those  allowances 
necessary  to  reconcile  the  rigor  of  principle  with  the  resistance  of 
practice,  and  the  total  sacrifice  of  all  principle,  there  is  a  wide 
difference.  If  in  the  Louisiana  negotiation  our  government  had 
insisted  on  obtaining  the  consent  of  the  people  before  the  con- 
clusion of  the  treaty,  in  all  probability  the  treaty  itself  never  could 
have  been  concluded.  A  momentary  departure  from  the  inflexible 
rigor  of  theory  was,  therefore,  perfectly  justifiable,  and  in  con- 
cluding the  treaty  we  acquired  a  power  over  the  territory  and  over 
the  inhabitants  which  requires,  so  far  as  relates  to  the  latter,  one 
thing  more  to  make  it  a  just  and  lawful  power.  I  mean  their  own 
consent.  For  although  the  necessity  of  the  case  might  excuse  us 
for  not  having  obtained  this  consent  beforehand,  it  could  not 
absolve  us  from  the  obligation  to  acquire  it  afterwards.  And  as 
nothing  but  necessity  can  justify  even  a  momentary  departure 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  29 

from  those  principles  which  we  hold  as  the  most  sacred  laws  of 
nature  and  of  nations,  so  nothing  can  justify  extending  the  de- 
parture beyond  the  bounds  of  the  necessity.  From  the  instant 
when  that  ceases  the  principle  returns  in  all  its  force,  and  every 
further  violation  of  it  is  error  and  crime. 

If  any  gentleman  can  controvert  the  principle  that  by  the  laws 
of  nature,  of  nations  and  of  God,  no  people  has  the  right  to  make 
laws  for  another  people  without  their  consent  unless  it  be  by  right  of 
conquest,  I  shall  be  glad  to  hear  him;  and  if  he  can  furnish  to  my 
unbiassed  reason  an  apology  for  lending  my  hand  to  make  a  single 
law  for  the  people  of  Louisiana  without  their  consent,  expressed 
or  implied,  I  will  not  only  vote  for  any  proper  law  that  may  be 
proposed,  but  confess  myself  under  deep  obligation  to  the  gentle- 
man who  shall  solve  my  scruples.  As  to  the  right  of  conquest  it 
must  be  out  of  the  question.  We  can  have  no  right  of  conquest 
over  a  people  who  have  never  injured  us.  The  law  of  conquest  is 
a  law  of  slavery,  and  the  people  of  Louisiana  whose  liberty  we 
are  solemnly  bound  to  protect  are  not  slaves. 

In  support  of  this  principle  I  have  already  quoted  the  highest 
possible  authority  for  an  American  citizen;  I  mean,  the  Declaration 
of  Independence.  Is  that  not  sufficient?  What  says  the  Consti- 
tution under  which  we  act?  "We  the  people,  &c.  for  ourselves  and 
our  posterity  —  for  the  United  States  of  America."  Not  for  the 
people  of  Louisiana  nor  for  any  other  people.  The  people  of  the 
United  States  knew  they  had  no  right  to  exercise  or  to  delegate 
the  powers  of  legislation  over  another  nation,  and  they  expressly 
limited  the  operations  of  the  Constitution  to  the  United  States  of 
America,  to  themselves  and  their  posterity. 


The  objections  which  I  have  urged  hitherto  against  the  passage 
of  this  bill  have  been  either  to  particular  details,  or  to  points  of 
expediency  and  considerations  of  justice  and  equity.  Powerful 
as  those  are  to  my  mind  they  are,  however,  of  an  order  inferior  to 
that  which  I  now  feel  it  my  duty  to  make.  I  cannot  prevail  upon 
myself  to  vote  for  a  law  with  a  clear  and  undoubting  conviction 


THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

of  my  own  mind  that  Congress  have  not  the  shadow  of  a  right  to 
pass  it.  Such  is  my  conviction  with  regard  to  the  act  upon  which 
we  are  now  to  decide.  I  long  indulged  the  hope  that  the  discussion 
of  this  question  would  have  been  avoided,  that  no  alteration  in  the 
laws,  and  more  especially  no  attempt  to  tax  the  people  of  Louis- 
iana, would  have  been  made,  until  in  some  shape  or  other  their 
formal  assent  to  our  authority  and  acquiescence  to  our  jurisdiction 
should  have  been  obtained.  I  have  been  disappointed  and  we 
are  now  called  upon  at  one  and  the  same  time  to  make  a  Constitu- 
tion of  government  for  a  people  who  have  never  recognized  our 
supremacy  over  them,  and  to  tax  for  our  own  benefit  a  people  of 
strangers,  without  admitting  them  to  representation  and  without 
asking  their  consent. 

The  act  upon  which  we  are  now  to  vote  is  an  act  to  tax  and  very 
heavily  to  tax  the  people  of  Louisiana  without  their  consent. 
This  I  apprehend  Congress  have  no  right  to  do. 

1.  Because  it  violates  the  natural  rights  of  the  people. 

2.  Because  it  violates  the  third  Article  of  the  Treaty  of  cession. 

3.  Because  no  such  authority  was  or  could  be  delegated  by  the 

Constitution. 

4.  Because  it  violates  the  principle  of  our  national  independence. 

5.  It  violates  the  natural  rights  of  the  people  of  Louisiana.1 

1  "I  do  not  disapprove  of  your  conduct  in  the  business  of  Louisiana.  I  think 
you  have  been  right,  though  I  know  it  will  become  a  very  unpopular  subject  in  the 
Northern  States,  especially  when  they  see  an  account  of  expenses  which  must  be 
occasioned  by  it."  John  Adams  to  John  Quincy  Adams,  February  25,  1804.  Ms. 

"I  hope  Mr.  A[dams]  will  learn  by  the  treatment  he  receives  from  the  dominant 
party  that  any  attempt  to  accommodate  himself  to  their  views  must  end  in  dis- 
appointment as  it  regards  him,  as  well  as  to  cause  regret  to  his  friends.  As  far  as  I 
have  been  able  to  observe,  he  inclines  to  be  peremptory.  Those  who  have  known  the 
father  will  readily,  I  conceive,  observe  as  one  has  done  before,  'Curse  on  the  strip- 
ling, how  he  apes  his  sire."  Theodore  Lyman  to  Timothy  Pickering,  January  4, 
1804.  Pickering  Mss.  "I  am  glad  that  the  quiddities  of  a  certain  person  [Adams] 
do  not  at  present  time  disturb  Col.  P[ickering],  but  people  will  and  must  act  accord- 
ing to  their  character."  Fisher  Ames  to  Stephen  Higginson,  January  27,  1804.  Ib. 
Higginson's  opinion  of  Adams  is  given  in  a  letter  to  Pickering,  February  15,  1804, 
printed  in  the  American  Historical  Association  Report,  1896,  I.  839. 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  31 

TO  PETER  CHARDON  BROOKS 

WASHINGTON,  21  January,  1804. 
DEAR  SIR: 

Since  I  wrote  you  last,  I  have  endeavored  to  ascertain  by 
inquiry  upon  which  I  could  depend  the  counsel  best  qualified 
to  do  justice  to  your  cause,1  who  will  probably  attend  here 
at  the  approaching  session  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the 
United  States.  The  result  of  this  inquiry  has  been  the  inten- 
tion to  fix  upon  Luther  Martin,  Esquire,  of  Baltimore,  a 
gentleman  whose  general  professional  eminence,  as  well  as 
his  particular  familiarity  with  causes  of  a  commercial  nature, 
are  universally  recognized  by  those  who  have  had  the  means 
of  knowing  him.  But  as  there  will  be  still  time  for  me  to 
receive  your  answer  to  this  before  the  sitting  of  the  Court,  if 
this  choice  should  not  be  satisfactory  to  you  or  the  gentleman 
concerned,  please  to  give  me  notice  of  it,  and  I  will  employ 
some  other. 

As  you  have  authorized  me  to  draw  upon  you  for  his  fees, 
as  well  as  my  own,  I  will  thank  you  for  instructions  respect- 
ing the  amount  of  those  you  would  choose  to  give  the  coun- 
sel I  shall  employ.  As  for  my  own  I  wish  you  to  have  as  little 
solicitude  as  I  have  myself,  but  I  presume  you  are  aware  the 
customary  fees  of  counsel  here  are  higher  than  in  Boston. 
Upon  inquiring  here  what  would  be  proper,  I  have  deter- 
mined to  give  Mr.  Martin  100  dollars  on  employing  him.  I 
presume  he  will  expect  a  further  compensation  should  the 
cause  come  to  trial.  But  being  desirous  not  to  exceed  your 
own  intentions  in  these  respects,  I  will  be  obliged  to  you  to 
let  me  know  them. 

I  find  by  inquiry  of  the  Clerk  of  the  Supreme  Court  that 

1  Church  v.  Hubbart,  2  Cranch,  187. 


32  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

the  papers  on  the  appeal  have  not  yet  been  received  at  his 
office.  Your  letter,  however,  has  very  clearly  opened  the 
points  made  by  the  plaintiff  at  the  trial  in  Boston.  If  you 
can  conveniently  procure  and  forward  to  me  copies  of  the 
papers  in  the  Circuit  Court,  it  will  enable  me  to  understand 
more  fully  the  case,  and  to  explain  it  to  the  gentleman  I  shall 
engage  for  you  in  time  to  be  prepared  for  a  trial  at  this  term. 
The  appellant  must  of  course  send  up  the  papers.  But  per- 
haps they  may  not  come  until  the  court  will  be  in  session, 
and  even  then  we  shall  want  copies  of  them  taken  here.  For 
the  clerk  of  the  Court  allows  no  papers  to  go  out  of  his  office.1 
I  am,  &c. 

TO  PETER  CHARDON  BROOKS 

WASHINGTON,  6  March,  1804. 
DEAR  SIR: 

I  am  sorry  that  it  is  not  in  my  power  to  inform  you  that 
the  judgment  of  the  Circuit  Court  in  the  case  of  Church  v. 
Hubbart  is  affirmed.  The  cause  was  argued  last  week  by 
Mr.  Stockton  and  Mr.  Martin  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Church  2 
(I  found  Mr.  Martin  on  his  arrival  here  engaged  for  Mr. 
Church,)  and  by  Mr.  J.  T.  Mason  3  of  this  place  and  myself 
for  Mr.  Hubbart.  The  Supreme  Court  have  reversed  the 
judgment  of  the  Circuit  Court  on  the  sole  ground  that  the 
Portuguese  papers  were  not  duly  authenticated. 

On  the  main  question  of  the  cause,  however,  which  was 
also  fully  argued,  the  Court  are  decidedly  of  opinion  that, 

xThe  suit  arose  on  a  policy  of  insurance  on  the  cargo  of  the  brig  Aurora,  Nathaniel 
Shaler,  master,  at  and  from  New  York  to  the  coast  of  Brazil,  with  a  warranty  against 
seizure  for  illicit  trade.  See  Moore,  Digest  of  International  Law,  I.  728. 

2  John  B.  Church. 

3  John  Thomson  Mason. 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  33 

supposing  the  papers  properly  proved,  the  loss  came  within 
the  exceptions  of  both  policies,  and  that  the  underwriters  are 
not  liable.  The  cause  is  remanded  to  the  Circuit  Court  for 
a  new  trial.  It  will  of  course  be  necessary  to  send  to  Lisbon 
again  to  get  the  papers  properly  attested.  I  must  observe 
to  you,  that  on  the  record  as  it  came  up  not  even  the  original 
Portuguese  papers  appeared,  there  was  nothing  but  Mr.  Jar- 
vis's  translation  and  certificate.  The  Court  here  held  that 
if  no  better  attestation  was  to  be  obtained,  that  fact  should 
have  been  proved;  that  the  originals,  exemplified  under  the 
great  Seal  of  Portugal,  taken  and  returned  under  a  commis- 
sion issued  from  the  Circuit  Court  itself  where  the  cause  was 
pending,  should  have  been  produced.  These,  however,  will 
only  occasion  further  delay  and  trouble  to  the  underwriters. 
If  Mr.  Church  chooses  to  carry  the  contest  any  further,  it  is 
at  least  certain  from  the  opinion  of  this  court  on  the  merits, 
that  he  must  eventually  lose  it.  I  would  recommend  to  the 
underwriters  to  be  peculiarly  cautious  at  their  next  effort 
to  get  the  papers  in  an  unquestionable  form. 
I  am,  &c. 


TO  RUFUS  GREENE  AMORY 

WASHINGTON,  6  March,  1804. 

DEAR  SIR: 

Immediately  on  receiving  your  letter  of  21  ultimo,  and 
that  of  Mr.  Hays  enclosing  the  newspaper  to  which  you 
refer,  I  applied  for  the  attested  copy  of  the  paper  you  request, 
which  is  promised  me,  and  which  I  will  send  you  as  soon  as 
it  is  made  out.  The  Spanish  order  was  not  published  from 
the  Department  of  State.  As  your  request  is  only  for  the 
order  of  20  April,  1799,  revoking  the  permission  to  neutrals 


34  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

to  trade,  I  suppose  you  will  not  be  desirous  of  a  copy  of  a 
subsequent  order,  dated  October  the  same  year,  and  reviving 
the  permission  to  neutrals  to  take  away  the  proceeds  of 
negro-cargoes,  which  subsequent  order,  I  am  informed  at  the 
State  Department,  is  also  in  possession  of  the  office. 

In  this  instance,  as  in  any  other  in  which  I  can  be  of  any 
service  to  you,  it  will  give  me  great  pleasure,  nor  should  I 
ever  think  of  making  a  charge  for  the  trouble  of  procuring 
you  a  necessary  paper,  or  any  other  piece  of  evidence  which 
you  may  want.  It  is  proper,  however,  that  you  should  be 
apprized,  that  in  one  action  pending  at  the  Massachusetts 
Supreme  Court  on  one  of  these  Plate-river  voyages,  I  was 
last  summer  of  counsel  for  the  underwriters.  It  was  the  case  of 
Pollock  v.  Babcock.  I  know  not  how  far  there  may  be  dis- 
tinctions between  this  and  the  two  actions  for  which  you 
want  evidence,  but  I  mention  it,  first,  as  a  reason  which 
would  induce  me  to  decline  charging  anything  for  any  serv- 
ice on  the  side  opposed  to  that  for  which  I  was  engaged,  even 
if  I  thought  I  could  fairly  make  a  charge  in  such  a  case  on  any 
consideration;  and  secondly,  that  in  any  communications  to 
me  on  the  subject,  you  may  be  aware  of  the  relation  in  which 
I  stood  to  the  questions  upon  these  policies. 

I  am,  &c. 

TO  TIMOTHY  PICKERING 

WASHINGTON,  March  n,  1804. 
DEAR  SIR: 

I  received  last  evening  your  obliging  favor,  and  have  de- 
liberately considered  the  proposal  it  contains.1  I  feel  myself 

1  Pickering  had  suggested  to  the  Senators  from  Connecticut  and  New  Hampshire, 
that  a  concise  and  clear  statement  of  the  Pickering  impeachment  trial  be  prepared 
to  be  signed  by  such  Senators  as  might  desire  to  bear  testimony  against  "This 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  35 

much  indebted  to  you  and  the  other  gentlemen  for  the  com- 
munication, and  for  the  desire  that  I  would  draw  up  a  state- 
ment of  the  circumstances,  which  have  attended  the  pro- 
ceedings upon  Judge  Pickering's  impeachment,  and  with 
which  we  have  been  so  justly  dissatisfied. 

I  regret  that  an  indisposition  which  confined  me  to  the 
house  this  day  will  deprive  me  of  the  opportunity  of  con- 
versing with  you  on  the  subject.  I  am  not  aware  of  any 
statement  which  I  could  draw  up  to  be  offered  at  the  time 
you  propose,  that  would  be  at  once  consistent  with  our  rules 
of  order,  and  a  full  exposition  of  our  reasons  to  justify  our 
own  conduct.  If  the  measure  should  not  be  itself  perfectly 
in  order,  its  tendency  would  be  to  produce  further  disorder  in 
the  proceedings  of  the  court;  and  as  irregularity  of  proceed- 
ing is  in  my  opinion  one  great  error  into  which  the  court 
has  been  led,  or  rather  driven,  I  should  be  anxious  as  much  as 
possible  to  avoid  anything  which  should  increase  this  irregu- 
larity, or  throw  any  part  of  its  blame  upon  those,  who  to  the 
utmost  of  their  power  have  struggled  against  it.  Perhaps, 
however,  a  statement  may  be  made  which,  without  being 
disorderly  itself,  will  at  the  same  time  serve  as  our  justifica- 
tion, and  as  our  testimony  against  the  course  which  has  been 
pursued.  If  so,  I  shall  most  readily  concur  in  it,  and  sub- 
scribe to  it.  Mr.  White's  resolution,  if  permitted  to  remain 
on  the  records,  will  serve  as  justification  to  us;  but  if  more 
can  with  propriety  be  done  before  the  judgment  is  pro- 
nounced, it  shall  have  my  hearty  assent. 

I  am,  &c. 

mockery  of  a  trial,  where  not  justice,  but  the  Demon  of  Party,  determined  the  pro- 
ceedings." He  asked  Adams  to  prepare  such  a  statement.  See  Adams,  New  Eng- 
land Federalism,  160.  Pickering's  request  is  in  Adams,  Memoirs,  March  12,  1804. 


36  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

TO  TIMOTHY  PICKERING 

WASHINGTON,  n  March,  1804. 
DEAR  SIR: 

On  further  reflection  since  this  morning,  I  have  thought 
of  a  mode  which  appears  to  me  not  out  of  order,  and  in 
which  we  can  express  our  sentiments  relative  to  the  proceed- 
ings of  the  court.  It  is  to  decline  answering  the  final  ques- 
tion, and  assign  the  reasons,  as  you  will  see  in  the  rough 
sketch  which  I  inclose.  If  this  should  meet  your  approba- 
tion and  that  of  the  other  gentlemen  with  whom  you  may 
consult,  I  will  when  called  upon  for  my  vote  declare  that  I 
cannot  answer,  and  offer  this  paper  in  behalf  of  myself,  and 
of  the  other  gentlemen  who  please  to  subscribe  it.  If  the 
paper  is  not  suffered  to  be  read,  and  we  are  either  required 
to  answer  or  excused,  we  can  publish  the  paper,  with  the 
statement  that  it  was  not  suffered  to  be  read.  If  you  would 
wish  any  alterations  or  additions,  please  to  make  them  and 
send  me  back  the  paper  to  copy  fair  tonight  or  tomorrow 
morning.  If  you  disapprove  the  plan,  please  keep  the  paper, 
and  return  it  to  me  when  we  meet  tomorrow. 

Yours  faithfully. 

[INCLOSURE] 

We  the  subscribers,  members  of  the  Senate  of  the  United  States, 
sitting  as  a  Court  of  Impeachment,  upon  the  impeachment  of 
John  Pickering,  Judge  of  the  District  Court,  for  the  District  of 
New  Hampshire,  request  to  be  excused  from  answering  the  ques- 
tion of  guilty  or  not  guilty,  upon  the  four  several  Articles  of  Im- 
peachment preferred  against  the  said  John  Pickering,  by  the 
House  of  Representatives  of  the  United  States. 

And  we  offer  the  following  as  our  reasons  for  declining  to  answer 


i8o4]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  37 

that  question  at  this  time.     Which  reasons  we  also  request  may 
be  entered  upon  the  records  of  the  Court. 

First.  Because  from  the  allegations  contained  in  the  petition 
of  Jacob  S.  Pickering,  son  of  the  said  John  Pickering,  and  supported 
by  the  depositions  of  Samuel  Tenney,  a  member  of  the  House  of 
Representatives  of  the  United  States,  of  Annie  R.  Cutter,  of 
Joshua  Brackett,  of  Edward  St.  Loe  Livermore  and  of  George 
Sullivan,  and  further  confirmed  by  circumstances  within  the  per- 
sonal knowledge  of  Simeon  Olcott  and  William  Plumer,  two  of  us, 
who  deposed  to  the  same  in  this  Court,  we  think  there  is  the 
highest  probability  that  the  said  John  Pickering  was,  at  the  time 
when  the  offences  alleged  in  the  said  Articles  of  Impeachment 
are  stated  to  have  been  committed,  and  for  some  time  before  and 
ever  since  has  been,  and  still  is  insane,  his  mind  wholly  deranged, 
deprived  of  the  exercise  of  judgment  and  the  faculties  of  reason, 
and  as  such  incapable  of  committing  a  crime  and  not  amenable 
for  his  actions  to  any  judicial  tribunal. 

Secondly.  Because  from  the  allegations  contained  in  the  said 
Jacob  S.  Pickering's  petition,  supported  by  some  of  the  same  de- 
positions above  referred  to,  it  appears,  that  from  the  bodily  in- 
firmities of  the  said  John  Pickering  it  was  not  possible  for  him 
to  have  been  present  at  the  day  fixed  by  the  Court  for  his  trial, 
without  immiment  danger  of  his  life. 

Thirdly.  Because  conceiving  impeachment  for  high  crimes  and 
misdemeanors  to  be  a  criminal  prosecution,  we  think  that  upon  a 
suggestion  of  present  insanity  of  the  person  accused,  supported  by 
credible  testimony,  the  Court  are  bound  by  law,  at  every  stage  of 
the  same,  to  stay  all  further  proceedings  until  the  truth  respecting 
the  alledged  fact  of  present  insanity  can  be  ascertained. 

Fourthly.  Because  all  the  evidence  produced  in  support  of  the 
said  Articles  of  Impeachment  was  taken  and  received  ex  parte, 
when  neither  the  said  John  Pickering,  nor  any  person  in  his  behalf, 
could  cross  examine  them,  or  have  an  opportunity  to  controvert 
its  competency  or  its  credibility. 

Fifthly.  Because  improper  evidence  was  received  against  the 


3  8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

said  John  Pickering  when  neither  he,  nor  any  person  in  his  behalf, 
nor  any  member  of  the  Court  could  assign  reasons  for  objections 
against  its  admission.  And  we  refer  particularly  to  the  testimony 
of  Michael  M'Clary,  of  Richard  Cutts  Shannon  and  of  Edward 
Hart,  who  were  permitted  and  required  to  give  their  opinions  and 
common  report,  as  to  the  cause  of  the  said  John  Pickering's  insanity 
and  disorders,  while  at  the  same  time  the  opinion  of  his  family 
physician  and  testimony  of  that  opinion  on  the  same  subject, 
were  excluded. 

Sixthly.  Because  from  all  these  circumstances  we  are  of  opinion 
that  the  said  John  Pickering  has  not  had  the  benefit  of  an  impartial 
trial;  that  he  has  not  had  an  opportunity  or  the  possibility  of 
being  heard  or  defended  either  by  himself  or  his  counsel.  And 

Seventhly.  Because,  although  believing  in  the  present  state  of  the 
testimony  received,  that  the  said  John  Pickering  is  not  guilty  of 
the  charges  alleged  against  him  in  the  said  four  Articles  of  Im- 
peachment, we  have  not  had  either  the  time  or  the  means  which 
we  conceive  necessary  and  proper  for  ascertaining  the  facts,  so  as 
to  enable  us  to  pronounce  his  acquittal.1 

TO  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS 

QUINCY,  25  May,  1804. 
•  •••••• 

As  to  Madame  de  Stael's  opinions  upon  the  subject  of 
divorce  and  the  marriage  vow,  they  are  such  as  might  be 
expected  from  her  history  and  her  character.  After  having 
sacrificed  all  decency  as  well  as  all  virtue  in  her  own  conduct, 
it  is  natural  enough  to  find  her  torturing  her  ingenuity  to 
give  Infamy  itself  a  wash  of  plausibility.  It  is  one  of  the  wise 
discoveries  of  the  French  Revolution  that  the  marriage  vow 
is  absurd,  because  it  promises  love  for  life,  which,  say  they, 
is  promising  what  is  not  within  our  own  power.  I  remember 

1  This  paper  was  not  acceptable  to  Pickering. 


i8o4]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  39 

that  when  the  great  regenerating  French  National  Conven- 
tion passed  their  law  to  make  divorce  just  as  easy  as  marriage, 
this  was  the  decisive  and  triumphant  argument  with  them. 
Yet  the  very  same  men,  who  could  not  promise  to  love  any- 
thing for  life,  unanimously  took  within  a  week  afterwards  an 
oath  of  eternal  hatred  to  monarchy.  They  could  vow  to  hate, 
not  to  love.  Their  objection,  however,  is  not  true.  Honest 
and  virtuous  minds  can  promise  to  love  for  life,  and  can  per- 
form the  promise.  Thousands  and  thousands  of  examples 
prove  it.  But  when  the  heart  has  long  been  wallowing  in  the 
kennels  of  corruption,  it  infects  the  understanding  and  pre- 
vails upon  it  to  make  common  cause. 

I  have  been  amusing  my  leisure  with  the  writings  of  a 
French  woman  of  another  age  and  a  different  character.  I 
mean  with  the  letters  of  Madame  de  Sevigne,  of  which  I  had 
read  some  volumes  heretofore.  She  lived  at  a  time  when  the 
morals  of  high  life  at  the  court  of  France  were  not  very  rigor- 
ous, but  her  own  conduct  was  always  exemplary.  Her  letters 
are  full  of  wit  and  playfulness,  but  they  are  at  the  same  time 
replete  with  honorable  sentiments,  with  pleasing  description, 
with  characters  sketched  at  a  glance;  with  infinite  variety  of 
anecdotes,  made  to  entertain  by  the  manner  in  which  they 
are  told,  even  when  of  the  most  inconsiderable  nature  in 
themselves. 


TO  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS 

QUINCY,   17  June,  1804. 
•  •  •  «  •  *  . 

Our  state  legislature  have  had  some  very  animated  debates 
within  the  last  ten  days.  If  you  read  the  Boston  papers  you 
may  have  remarked  the  answer  of  the  Senate  to  the  Cover- 


40  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

nor's  speech.1  I  believe  Quincy  drew  it  up.  It  contains  some 
remarks  which  stirred  the  blood  of  several  gentlemen,  who 
thought  that  every  censure  upon  political  hypocrites  and  im- 
postors must  of  course  be  meant  for  them.  They  attacked  it 
with  no  small  violence,  but  without  success. 

Then  came  on  a  question  about  the  manner  of  choosing 
electors  for  President  and  Vice  President,  whether  by  dis- 
tricts or  by  a  general  ticket.  The  latter  was  adopted  after 
long  and  bitter  opposition,  among  the  supporters  of  which 
Mr.  [Perez]  Morton  has  made  himself  very  conspicuous. 

Last  of  all  they  have  begun  to  carve  out  work  for  their 
Senators  in  Congress.  A  motion  has  passed  the  House  of 
Representatives,2  and  either  has  or  probably  will  go  through 
the  Senate  to  instruct  the  Senators  of  the  state  in  the  national 
legislature  to  use  their  endeavors  for  obtaining  an  amend- 
ment to  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,  whereby  the 
representation  of  slaves  shall  be  done  away.  All  this  I  know 
only  by  hearsay  and  the  newspapers,  for  I  have  not  been 
near  Boston  since  the  General  Court  met.  .3 


TO  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS 

QUINCY,  13  July,   1804. 

•  •••••• 

I  had  seen  in  some  newspaper  an  account  of  one  incendiary 
attempt  at  Mount  Vernon,  but  am  surprised  that  it  should 
so  often  have  been  repeated  without  detection.4  We  have 

1  Printed  in  the  Repertory,  June  15,  1804. 

2  Introduced  by  William  Ely,  representative  of  Springfield. 

3  The  original  form  of  these  instructions  are  printed  in  the  Repertory,  June  15, 
1804;  and  a  copy  of  the  final  form  is  in  the  Adams  Mss. 

4  "There  have  been  five  attempts  made  to  destroy  Mount  Vernon.    Mrs.  Wash- 
ington dare  not  sleep  there  when  Mr.  Washington  is  from  home.    A  few  days  since 


i8o4]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  41 

just  now  seen  published  the  famous  charge  of  Judge  Bowen 
to  a  grand  jury  in  Georgia,  which  you  will  find  in  some  of  the 
papers.1  I  think  it  to  the  credit  of  the  Georgia  people  that 
they  suffered  him  to  get  away  with  a  whole  skin.  For  al- 
though there  is  nothing  more  strong  as  to  principle  in  the 
charge,  than  Mr.  Jefferson  himself  has  published  in  his  Notes 
on  Virginia^  yet  Bowen  went  one  step  further.  He  drew  the 
inference  from  the  theory,  and  then  the  madness  of  the  doc- 
trines appeared  in  full  view. 

I  wish  the  report  you  have  heard,  that  Mr.  W.  Pinkney, 
on  his  return  to  this  country,  is  to  be  appointed  Attorney 
General,  may  prove  to  be  well-founded,  but  I  suspect  Mr. 
Lincoln  will  not  so  readily  loosen  his  hold  of  the  place.  It 
seems  the  successor  to  Mr.  Livingston  at  the  Imperial  Court 
of  France  is  to  be  General  Armstrong,  and  General  Smith 
must  yet  content  his  ambition  with  being  uncle-in-law  to  his 
imperial  highness,  the  Arch  Duke  Jerome.  This  much  for 
liberty,  equality,  fraternity,  French  Republics,  one  and  in- 
divisible, and  the  unalienable  rights  of  man. 

TO  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS 

QUINCY,  19  July,  1804. 
•  •••••• 

Conversation  now  can  scarcely  turn  upon  any  other  sub- 
ject than  the  late  horrible  duel  at  New  York.  The  circum- 

a  servant  went  into  the  cellar  for  something  in  the  evening,  and  found  it  in  a  blaze. 
They  put  it  out  with  difficulty  and  on  searching  the  cellar  discovered  a  barrel  filled 
with  tar  shavings,  etc.,  prepared  to  set  fire  to.  The  gardener,  an  Irishman,  is  sup- 
posed to  have  done  it,  and  has  been  confined  in  consequence;  but  this  last  attempt 
has  been  made  since  his  confinement."  Louisa  Catherine  Adams  to  John  Quincy 
Adams,  July  4,  1804.  Ms. 

1  See  Massachusetts  Spy,  May  16,  30,  1804.  Jabez  Bowen,  Jun.,  was  judge  of  the 
Superior  Court  for  the  Eastern  District  of  Georgia, 


42  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

stances  which  led  to  it,  and  the  manner  in  which  it  was  con- 
ducted, are  as  yet  very  imperfectly  known;  but  I  cannot 
conceive  any  possible  circumstances  which  can  justify  the 
conduct  of  Mr.  Burr,  either  preceding  the  fatal  day,  or  im- 
mediately subsequent  to  it.  His  principal  aim  appears  to 
have  been  to  make  a  display  of  indifference  and  unconcern, 
and  this  he  did  in  a  manner  which  in  its  fairest  light  can  only 
be  considered  as  an  excess  of  affectation. 

22  July,   1804. 

•  •««»•• 

We  have  now  seen  the  correspondence  between  Mr.  Burr 
and  General  Hamilton  which  led  to  their  fatal  meeting,  and 
I  am  fully  confirmed  in  the  opinion  I  had  entertained  of  the 
transaction  before.  Mr.  Burr  began  by  making  a  demand  of 
General  Hamilton  which  he  must  have  known  Hamilton 
could  not,  and  ought  not  to  answer.  To  make  the  matter 
more  sure  he  couched  the  demand  in  terms  at  which  a  much 
cooler  man  than  Hamilton  must  have  spurned.  The  sub- 
stance was  so  vague  and  indefinite,  as  to  render  impossible 
the  very  avowal  or  disavowal  it  affected  to  require.  The 
form  was  studied  to  provoke  and  insult,  by  an  assumption 
of  superiority  which  a  man  of  spirit  could  not  submit  to. 
Hamilton  saw  through  the  artifice,  and  yet  had  not  a  suffi- 
cient control  over  his  own  passions,  or  a  sufficient  elevation 
over  the  prejudices  of  the  world  to  parry  it.  Had  he  omitted 
half  a  line  in  his  first  answer  which  must  be  considered  as  in- 
viting a  challenge,  I  see  nothing  on  his  part  of  the  corre- 
spondence against  which  any  reasonable  objection  can  be 
raised.  The  conduct  of  Mr.  Burr  through  the  whole  affair 
appears  to  me  strongly  to  corroborate  that  opinion  of  his 
character  which  his  enemies  have  long  ascribed  to  him.1 

1  See  Adams,  New  England  Federalism,  163. 

"On  Thursday  (the  day  before  yesterday)  there  was  a  funereal  procession  and  an 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  43 

You  remember  they  used  to  joke  at  Berlin  about  Prince 
Louis  (Bonaparte),  but  in  sober  sadness  it  has  come  to  the 
same  thing.  This  is  the  turn  of  one  tire  more  in  the  wheel 
of  the  French  Revolution,  but  it  has  not  yet  got  completely 
round.  Poor  Jerome,  who  is  so  cavalierly  left  out  of  the  line 
of  aggrandizement  and  succession,  must  be  content  to  sing 
to  the  tune  of  "All  for  Love,  or  the  world  well  lost."  And 
well  lost  in  my  opinion  it  really  will  be  for  him.  I  have  been 
told,  however,  that  in  his  marriage  articles  there  is  an  express 
provision  made  for  the  possible  case  of  his  getting  sick  of  his 
bargain  and  casting  off  the  lady — a  stipulation  which  is 
equally  marked  with  humility  and  with  prudence  on  her 
part. 

As  to  titles,  if  what  we  see  in  the  papers  be  true,  the 
French  are  going  to  plunge  into  them  with  all  the  fondness  of 
children  for  a  new  rattle.  There  is  Imperial  Majesty  Joseph- 
ine, Imperial  Highnesses  Joseph  and  Louis,  Grand  Elector, 
and  High  Constable,  Serene  Highness,  Arch  Chancellor  Cam- 
baceres,  and  Arch  Treasurer  Lebrun,  etc.,  etc.  Was  there 
ever  so  horrible  a  tragedy  concluded  with  so  ridiculous  a 
farce? 

TO  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS 

QUINCY,  23   September,   1804. 
.«*•••* 
We  have  had  in  the  course  of  the  last  week  a  celebration  of 
an  unusual  kind  here.    It  is  called  the  installation  of  a  Lodge 

eulogium  upon  General  Hamilton  delivered  in  the  Chapel  Church  at  Boston,  by  Mr. 
Otis.  I  did  not  go  to  hear  it;  for  although  far  from  being  disposed  at  this  time  to 
contest  the  merits  of  Mr.  Hamilton,  neither  the  manner  of  his  death,  nor  his  base 
treatment  of  more  than  one  of  my  connections,  would  permit  me  to  join  in  any  out- 
ward demonstration  of  regret  which  I  could  not  feel  at  heart.  Otis,  as  you  will 
readily  believe,  acquitted  himself  very  well  of  his  performance."  To  Louisa  Cath- 
erine Adams,  July  28,  1804.  Ms. 


44  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

of  Free  Masons.  It  was  performed  at  the  meeting  house, 
with  a  sermon  by  Mr.  Whitney,  and  a  prayer  by  Mr.  Harris, 
preceded  by  a  Masonic  procession  to  the  house,  followed  by 
a  Masonic  dinner  at  the  Town  Hall.  All  of  which  we  were 
invited  by  the  lodge  to  attend,  and  did  attend,  excepting  my 
brother  who  was  detained  at  home  by  a  visit  from  Mr. 
Palaeska,  who  came  up  from  Boston  to  dine  with  him.  The 
weather  was  somewhat  unfavorable,  as  during  the  procession 
there  was  a  small  rain  that  annoyed  us  not  a  little.  The 
ceremonies  have  nothing  in  them  very  striking,  but  the 
house  was  very  much  crowded,  and  B.  Russell,  who  per- 
formed a  conspicuous  character  as  Marshall  of  the  Royal 
Arch  Lodge,  has  given  a  pompous  account  of  the  day  in  his 
Centinel. 

I  was  last  evening  at  Mr.  Quincy's  to  pass  an  evening  hour, 
and  as  he  was  not  nor  any  of  his  family  at  the  celebration,  I 
gave  them  an  account  of  it.  This  naturally  leading  to  a  con- 
versation on  the  subject  of  Free  Masonry  in  general,  I  in- 
dulged myself  at  some  length  and  with  great  freedom  on  the 
nature  of  the  institutions  and  its  effects,  until  all  at  once  it 
came  out  that  Quincy  himself  was  of  the  brotherhood.  This 
incident,  however,  as  the  whole  conversation  had  been  per- 
fectly good  humored,  contributed  only  to  divert  us,  and  I 
tasked  him  for  his  inexcusable  neglect  of  attending  at  the 
installation.  .  .  . 

I  observe  in  the  newspapers  that  somebody  in  London  (I 
suppose  it  must  be  Dickins)  has  published  in  a  volume  my 
letters  on  Silesia,  pilfered  doubtless  from  the  Port  Folio.  And 
to  help  the  sale,  has  not  only  given  my  name,  but  added  a 
despicable  parade  of  rank  and  titles  to  it,  which  a  rational 
man  cannot  hear  thus  applied  without  laughing.  I  can  in- 
deed as  well  as  most  people  bear  to  be  laughed  at,  when 
knowing  the  occasion  to  be  trivial  in  its  nature  or  not  pro- 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  45 

ceeding  from  my  own  fault,  and  therefore  I  shall  concern 
myself  very  little  with  this  bookseller's  device  for  gull- 
catching.  But  there  was  one  of  those  letters  which  ought 
never  to  have  been  published  at  all,  and  would  not  have  been 
but  by  accident  and  an  inattention  which  I  could  not  con- 
trol. 

It  contained  an  allusion  to  the  domestic  history  of  certain 
characters  we  met  at  Dresden,  and  having  no  relation  what- 
ever to  the  Silesian  tour,  ought  never  to  have  been  published 
with  it.  While  the  letters  were  confined  to  the  Port  Folio 
I  consoled  myself  that  this  indiscreet  part  of  the  publication 
would  never  reach  the  persons  to  whom  it  must  give  pain, 
and  who  imputing  it  to  me  would  think  it  very  ill-return  for 
civilities  and  good-offices.  Now  however  it  appears  to  me 
more  than  probable  that  some  "d — d  good-natured  friend' 
will  not  fail  to  convey  the  obnoxious  matter  to  those  most 
affected  by  it,  and  they  will  think  very  hardly  of  me  for  it. 
It  is,  however,  too  late  for  a  remedy.  As  to  the  publication 
itself,  it  will  certainly  not  tend  to  place  me  on  that  point  of 
literary  fame  to  which  I  should  aspire,  if  to  any  at  all.  The 
whole  collection  was  written  for  my  own  amusement  and 
that  of  my  friends  in  this  country,  without  any  design  for 
publication.  The  observations  of  my  own,  therefore,  con- 
tained in  them  are  superficial,  and  the  whole  valuable  matter 
is  taken  from  the  German  tourists  and  other  writers  on  the 
province.  The  credit  due  for  all  this  is  of  a  very  humble 
nature  indeed,  and  if  I  should  ever  appear  voluntarily  before 
the  public  as  a  candidate  for  the  reputation  of  an  author, 
it  would  be  with  pretensions  of  rather  more  elevation.  I 
must,  however,  be  content  with  things  as  they  are.  If 
Heaven  should  grant  me  life  and  health,  I  hope  at  some  future 
day  to  offer  something  of  more  value  to  the  world.  But  as 
yet  I  am  only  preparing  myself  to  undertake  it,  and  like 


46  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

many  other  good  resolutions  it  will  perhaps  never  come  to  the 
maturity  of  accomplishment.  .  .  .1 

PUBLIUS  VALERIUS  2 
Serious  Reflections,  Addressed  to  the  Citizens  of  Massachusetts 

No.  I  3 

As  the  time  is  approaching  when  the  People  of  this  Common- 
wealth will  be  called  to  give  their  suffrages  for  electors  of  President 
and  Vice  President  of  the  United  States,  and  also  of  members  for 
the  national  House  of  Representatives,  it  is  of  importance  to  them 
to  fix  the  principles  which  ought  to  govern  them  in  their  choice. 
Candidates  of  various  descriptions  and  of  militating  political 
sentiments  will  be  held  up  to  their  view,  and  recommended  to 
their  suffrages,  by  the  friends  of  the  past  and  the  partisans  of  the 
present  administration  of  the  general  government.  It  is  not  my 
intention  to  advocate  or  to  oppose  the  election  of  any  individual, 
but  as  a  sincere  friend  to  the  interests  of  my  country,  to  submit 
some  observations  to  my  fellow  citizens,  concerning  the  principles 
to  which  I  believe  their  own  interest  directs  them,  for  the  deter- 

1  "You  will  see  that  the  Spanish  Marquis  [Yrujo]  has  given  great  offence  to  our 
friend  Jackson  by  a  very  courteous  attempt  to  make  him  subservient  to  his  present 
political  purposes.    Jackson  appears  not  to  be  well  versed  in  the  profundities  of 
diplomatic  skill,  and  not  at  all  to  understand  the  art  of  filing  down  corruption  into 
patriotism.    It  is,  however,  possible  that  he  may  have  given  the  Marquis's  pro- 
posals a  construction  different  from  what  was  intended.    He  might  only  mean  to 
obtain  a  vehicle  for  popular  negotiation  against  the  present  administration  among 
the  federalists,  such  as  he  formerly  used  against  their  predecessors,  with  his  worthy 
friends  of  that  day.    He  was  somewhat  indiscreet  indeed  in  talking  about  political 
intolerance,  and  an  administration  which  he  would  not  call  a  government,  to  a  per- 
son so  much  of  a  stranger  to  him  as  Jackson."    To  Louisa  Catherine  Adams,  Sep- 
tember 30,  1804.    Ms.    On  the  incident  see  Henry  Adams,  History,  II.  265. 

2  In  the  Adams  Papers  are  the  original  manuscripts  of  Nos.  2,  3  and  5  of  these 
articles. 

1  The  Repertory,  October  26,  1804. 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  47 

mination  of  their  votes,  between  the  several  claimants  to  their 
favor. 

The  government  of  the  United  States  is  to  be  considered  in  a 
two  fold  view:  First,  as  an  association  of  the  people,  and  secondly, 
as  a  confederation  of  the  States  which  constitute  the  North  Amer- 
ican Union.  The  representation  of  the  States  is  in  the  Senate,  and 
that  of  the  people  in  the  House  of  Representatives.  The  duties 
of  the  members  of  these  respective  branches  of  the  general  legis- 
lature are  correspondent  to  the  stations  in  which  they  are  placed. 
And  consequently  it  behooves  every  senator  to  support  and  main- 
tain the  interests  of  the  State  by  which  he  is  delegated;  as  it  is 
incumbent  on  the  representatives  to  promote  with  a  warm  and 
honest  zeal  those  of  the  people  by  whom  he  was  elected.  I  shall 
not  be  understood  as  meaning  to  say  that  the  senator  of  any  State, 
or  the  representative  from  any  section  of  the  people,  ought  so 
exclusively  to  pursue  the  interests  of  his  immediate  constituents, 
as  to  wish  that  those  of  the  whole  union  or  of  any  part  of  it  should 
be  sacrificed  to  them;  but  that  he  should  so  far  be  devoted  to 
those  from  whom  he  derives  his  powers,  as  on  no  consideration 
whatsoever  to  suffer  their  just  interests  to  be  sacrificed  to  the 
partial  views  and  purposes  of  others.  Addressing  then  the  people 
of  Massachusetts,  I  trust  they  will  feel  the  force  of  the  argument 
when  I  say:  fellow  citizens,  in  choosing  your  representatives,  be 
sure  to  choose  men  who  will  support  your  own  interests.  Those  of 
other  parts  of  the  Union,  you  may  be  assured,  will  be  sufficiently 
represented  and  supported  without  your  assistance.  The  people 
of  Virginia  will  not  choose  Representatives  who  will  abandon 
their  interests  for  the  sake  of  advancing  yours;  you  cannot  expect 
or  wish  that  they  should;  let  it  be  your  care  on  your  part  to  elect 
men,  who  shall  have  no  bias  on  their  minds,  the  tendency  of  which 
will  be  to  prostrate  your  legitimate  rights  at  the  feet  of  Virginian 
policy. 

Since  the  first  association  of  the  United  Colonies  at  the  dawn 
of  the  American  revolution,  there  never  has  been  a  time,  when  it 
so  essentially  imported  to  the  people  of  Massachusetts  to  make 


48  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

reflections  like  these,  and  to  act  conformably  to  them.  During 
the  war  of  the  revolution  and  the  first  confederation,  Massachu- 
setts was  among  the  first  in  support  of  the  common  cause.  The 
treasures  and  the  blood  of  her  citizens  freely  flowed  for  the  benefit 
of  the  Union,  while  afflicted  with  the  miseries  of  War.  After  the 
peace,  she  exhibited  in  an  eminent  degree,  the  same  enlarged  and 
liberal  spirit.  She  readily  complied  with  the  requisitions  of  Con- 
gress for  raising  funds  to  discharge  the  obligations  of  the  public 
faith,  and  actually  taxed  herself  by  commercial  regulations,  until 
she  found  she  was  only  raising  rival,  and  less  generous  neighbors 
upon  her  own  ruins.  At  the  formation  and  adoption  of  the  present, 
or  rather  the  late  national  Constitution,  her  conciliatory  spirit, 
and  willingness  to  yield  much  for  the  general  good  were  equally 
conspicuous.  Equally  conspicuous  have  they  been  during  the 
administration  of  that  government;  and  while  she  has  uniformly 
borne  more  than  her  proportion  of  all  the  burdens,  she  has  been 
content  to  share,  at  most,  her  equal  part  of  the  blessings  derived 
from  it.  But  neither  under  the  old  confederation,  nor  under  the 
Constitution  of  1787,  had  she  ever,  until  very  recently,  a  formid- 
able party  within  her  own  bosom,  whose  systematic  policy  it  was 
to  make  her  peculiar  interests  a  sacrifice  to  those  of  another  quar- 
ter of  the  Union.  The  members  of  her  own  legislature,  and  her 
delegations  to  the  national  councils  have  been  Massachusetts 
men,  who  felt  it  their  duty  to  support  by  all  fair  and  honorable 
means  the  measures  most  favorable  to  her  interests,  and  who 
would  have  thought  it  treachery  of  the  deepest  dye  to  make 
themselves  the  servile  instruments  of  a  policy  directly  hostile  to 
their  own  constituents.  Now,  however,  this  singular  phenomenon 
has  appeared:  and  at  the  late  session  of  the  General  Court,  the 
most  unequivocal  proof  has  been  exhibited,  of  a  strong  party,  who 
build  all  their  hopes  of  success  upon  the  basis  of  unlimited  devo- 
tion to  a  system,  the  first  feature  of  which  is  the  annihilation  of 
New  England  weight  and  influence  in  the  Union. 

It  is  painful  to  be  under  the  necessity  of  stating  this  fact.     It 
is  painful  to  remark  to  what  extremes  faction  and  ambition  have 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  49 

already  proceeded  in  this  country.  But  it  cannot  be  disguised 
and  ought  not  to  be  concealed.  It  is  possible  to  believe  that  this 
subserviency  to  foreign  views,  and  this  immolation  of  their  own 
interests  have  reached  the  mass  of  the  people.  The  mass  of  the 
people  have  no  private  and  selfish  purposes  to  answer  by  rec- 
ommending themselves  to  the  favor  of  the  national  executive. 
They  have  no  offices  to  obtain  from  the  removal  of  honest,  able 
and  faithful  federalists.  They  have  no  reward  in  prospect  from 
the  prostration  of  personal  or  political  antagonists.  They  therefore 
have  no  motive  to  betray  themselves.  If  then  it  be  made  manifest 
to  them,  that  a  numerous  and  closely  combined  party  of  the  men 
in  whom  they  have  placed  their  confidence  have,  whether  from 
personal  or  from  factious  motives,  surrendered  themselves  up 
without  reserve  to  a  political  system  in  direct  hostility  to  the  fair 
and  just  interests  of  the  people,  whom  they  represent,  the  danger 
that  impends  will  be  fully  disclosed,  and  the  effectual  guard  against 
it  will  be  seasonably  applied.  The  confidence  which  has  been 
betrayed  will  be  transferred,  from  hollow  professions,  to  solid 
merit;  from  fawning  flattery,  to  honest  zeal;  from  selfish  faction, 
to  pure  patriotism;  and  Massachusetts  will  recover  that  weight  and 
influence  in  the  Union,  which  some  of  her  own  sons  have  unblush- 
ingly  attempted  to  wrest  from  her. 

I  am  aware  that  assertions  like  these  ought  not  to  be  made  on 
light  grounds.  In  the  ardor  of  political  controversy  it  is  but  too 
common  to  see  men  entertain  unjust  and  unwarrantable  suspicions 
of  their  adversaries,  and  impute  to  them  motives,  which  are  not 
theirs.  So  long  as  the  party  in  this  Commonwealth,  in  opposition 
to  the  present  administration  of  its  government  kept  within  the 
bounds  of  decency  and  moderation;  nay,  so  long  as  they  were  grati- 
fied by  the  arts  of  popular  courtship  to  blazon  their  own  pretensions 
to  favor,  and  to  run  down  opponents,  whose  public  merits  and  pri- 
vate virtues  could  never  suffer  by  comparison  with  their  own, 
however  ungenerous  and  censurable  their  procedure,  its  effects 
were  not  immediately  pernicious  and  dangerous  to  their  country. 
When  at  one  of  our  annual  periods  of  election,  their  heaviest 


50  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

engine  of  detraction  against  the  governor  of  the  Commonwealth 
was  a  charge  of  carriage  hire  for  attendance  at  a  funeral;  when  at 
another  their  most  elaborate  topic  of  reproach,  was  the  rent  of  the 
Province  House,  their  patriotic  economies  were  estimated  at  their 
true  value;  their  slanders  were  even  productive  of  good  effects,  for 
when  complaints  like  those  were  dwelt  upon,  with  the  choicest  of 
their  bitterness,  the  evidence  was  irresistible,  that  no  reasonable 
ground  for  complaint  existed.  But  when  from  the  circulation  of 
petty  calumny  against  the  governor,  they  proceeded  to  bold  as- 
sault upon  the  clearest  and  most  important  interests  of  the  State, 
when  after  spending  their  most  envenomed  arrows  in  fruitless 
efforts  against  individual  virtue,  they  selected  their  last  shaft  to 
aim  at  the  vitals  of  their  country,  it  became  the  duty  of  every  real 
friend  to  that  country  to  resist,  and  expose  them. 

At  the  late  session  of  the  legislature  three  occasions  happened 
when  the  party  in  opposition  to  the  present  administration  of  the 
Commonwealth,  discovered  their  unqualified  devotion  to  the  in- 
terests of  Virginia,  or  rather  to  the  views  of  Mr.  Jefferson.  The 
first  was  a  motion  for  making  certain  additions  to  the  answer  of  the 
House  to  the  governor's  speech.  The  object  of  this  was  personal 
adulation  to  the  President  of  the  United  States.  The  second  was 
the  vehement  opposition  and  indecent  protests  against  the  choice 
of  electors  for  President  and  Vice  President,  by  a  general  ticket. 
And  the  third  was  the  struggle  against  the  motion  of  Mr.  Ely  for 
instructing  the  senators  of  the  Commonwealth  in  Congress,  to 
propose  an  amendment  to  the  national  Constitution,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  correcting  that  humiliating  inequality  which  gives  a  repre- 
sentation to  the  slave-holding  Southern  planters,  nearly  double 
to  that  of  the  Massachusetts  farmer.  On  each  of  these  transac- 
tions I  shall  submit  to  the  public  remarks  which  will  tend  to 
elucidate  the  motives  in  which  the  conduct  of  the  opposition  party 
originated.  I  shall  examine  the  arguments  alleged  by  themselves, 
and  endeavor  to  point  out  the  difference  between  their  outward 
practice  and  their  real  purposes.  After  the  lessons  of  experience 
which  have  so  recently  been  taught  to  all  the  republicans  by  the 


i8o4]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  51 

terrible  example  of  the  French  revolution  and  its  last  catastrophe, 
the  people  of  Massachusetts,  turning  an  eye  upon  themselves,  have 
the  deepest  interest  to  inquire,  what  are  the  real  designs  of  that 
party,  which  has  always  held  up  the  revolution  as  the  theme  of 
their  highest  admiration  and  applause. 

II1 

When  the  answer  of  the  House  of  Representatives  of  the  Com- 
monwealth, to  the  governor's  speech,  at  the  opening  of  the  last 
session,  was  in  debate  before  the  House,  a  long  panegyric  upon  the 
present  administration  of  the  national  government  was  moved  by 
Mr.  Perez  Morton,  of  Dorchester,  to  be  inserted  in  the  answer  by 
way  of  amendment.  Mr.  Morton,  both  in  the  motion  upon  which 
I  am  about  to  remark,  and  in  the  other  party  measures  of  the  ses- 
sion, assumed  exclusively  the  lead  in  the  House  of  Representatives; 
the  stability  of  his  political  opinions,  their  character  and  their 
tendency,  are  of  no  small  importance  as  indications  of  the  views 
which  actuate  him  and  his  followers. 

Mr.  Morton  of  late  years  has  been  a  very  ardent  partisan  of  that 
political  denomination  among  us  who,  by  a  manoeuvre  borrowed 
from  France,  the  prototype  of  all  their  party  tactics,  and  suggested 
to  them  in  the  famous  intercepted  letter  of  Fauchet,  the  minister 
of  Robespierre  in  this  country,  affect  exclusively  to  style  them- 
selves republicans. 

Mr.  Morton  is,  of  course,  a  profound  admirer  of  the  sublime  vir- 
tues and  stupendous  talents  of  Mr.  Jefferson,  whose  tender  sym- 
pathies for  the  French  revolution  have  been  so  perfectly  congenial 
with  his  own.  This  admiration  he  has  more  than  once  anxiously 
endeavored  to  communicate  to  the  legislature  of  Massachusetts. 
In  the  January  session  of  1802,  he  labored  with  the  burden  of  his 
admiration  so  much,  that  he  attempted  to  bring  it  forth  in  the  form 
of  an  Address  to  the  President  of  the  United  States;  and  not  having 
at  that  time  any  of  the  topics  for  approbation  which  he  has  now 

1  The  Repertory,  October  30,  1804. 


52  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

chosen  to  specify,  He  was  at  no  loss  for  others  equally  well  founded. 
At  that  time  the  principal  achievements  of  Mr.  Jefferson's  ad- 
ministration had  been  the  repayment  of  Callender's  fine;  the  nolle 
prosequi  to  screen  Duane  from  punishment;  the  squandered  thou- 
sands upon  the  Berceau;  the  dismission  of  numerous  honest,  capa- 
ble, and  faithful  servants  of  the  public,  to  make  way  for  their 
counterparts  of  an  opposite  sect;  and  above  all  the  comment  upon 
the  inaugural  speech,  in  the  answer  to  the  merchants  of  New 
Haven.  The  destruction  of  the  federal  judiciary  was  resolved,  but 
not  then  accomplished.  Still  Mr.  Morton  had  no  dearth  of  mate- 
rials for  his  address,  and  could  he  have  persuaded  a  majority  of  his 
fellow  legislators  to  participate  in  his  zeal,  was  even  then,  no  less 
than  at  present,  ready 

To  crook  the  pregnant  hinges  of  the  knee, 
Where  thrift  might  follow  fawning. 

The  two  succeeding  winters,  Mr.  Morton  has  passed  at  the  city 
of  Washington,  as  a  humble  solicitor  to  Mr.  Jefferson  and  his 
administration,  for  simple  justice  in  a  private  concern,  without 
being  able  to  obtain  it.  He  is  personally  interested  in  what  has 
been  called  the  Yazoo  purchase  of  Georgia  lands;  and  has  been 
employed  by  the  other  proprietors  as  their  agent  to  support  their 
claims  upon  the  government  of  the  United  States.  The  last  winter, 
after  having  been  fed  with  airy  promises  year  after  year,  and  after 
a  majority  of  the  national  House  of  Representatives  had  decided 
that  these  claimants  ought  to  be  indemnified,  behold,  Mr.  John 
Randolph  came  out  with  a  string  of  resolutions,  the  purpose  of 
which  was  to  declare  that  no  such  indemnity  should  be  given;  and 
Mr.  Thomas  Randolph,  Mr.  Jefferson's  son-in-law,  in  a  speech 
highly  celebrated  for  its  eloquence,  the  only  speech  he  made  during 
the  whole  session,  supported  the  principles  of  his  namesake. 

It  was  observed  by  Voltaire,  that  in  his  time  the  Parisian  cour- 
tiers were  in  the  constant  practice  of  riding  post  haste  to  Versailles, 
to  receive  buffetings  which,  post  haste,  they  went  back  to  return 
at  Paris.  Just  so  it  appears  to  be  with  Mr.  Morton.  He  goes 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  53 

annually  to  Washington,  to  ask  justice  for  himself  and  others.  He 
implores  it  as  a  favor,  and  it  is  denied;  but  he  abates  not  a  jot  of 
heart  and  hope.  Mr.  Jefferson  he  knows  favors  his  claim,  though 
Mr.  Jefferson's  son-in-law  reserves  all  the  thunders  of  his  eloquence 
to  oppose  it;  another  winter  Mr.  John  Randolph's  influence  may 
be  diminished  in  the  House  of  Representatives;  or  perhaps  his 
docility  to  private  lessoning  may  become  such  that  he  will  with- 
draw his  opposition.  So  Mr.  Morton  comes  home;  perseveres  in 
his  admiration  of  Mr.  Jefferson,  with  unabating  fervor,  and  re- 
turns the  buffetings  he  received  at  the  federal  city,  in  offensive 
reflections  upon  the  majority  in  the  Massachusetts  legislature. 

Let  us  now  turn  from  the  man  to  the  motion.  As  in  the  former 
we  find  certain  sources  of  devotion  to  Mr.  Jefferson  and  a  Vir- 
ginian policy,  other  than  those  of  public  spirit,  so  in  the  latter  we 
shall  find  causes  of  admiration  alleged  distinguishable  by  a  similar 
remoteness  from  the  fountains  of  truth.  In  short,  Mr.  Morton 
appears  to  be  gifted  with  the  endowment  of  the  great  McFingal  — 
he  sees  what  is  not  to  be  seen. 

The  first  assertion  which  evinces  this  sharpness  of  his  optics  is 
that  which  he  has  chosen  to  place  in  the  front  of  his  commenda- 
tions. "That  the  general  government,  without  the  aid  of  direct 
taxes  and  burthensome  excises,  have  effected  an  important  diminu- 
tion of  the  public  debt  by  the  appropriation  of  seven  millions  of 
dollars  annually  to  that  object." 

1.  It  is  not  true  that  the  general  government  has  appropriated 
seven  millions  of  dollars  annually  to  the  diminution  of  the  public 
debt. 

2.  It  is  not  true  that  the  portion  of  the  old  debts  of  the  United 
States  which  they  have  discharged  was  paid  off  by  them  without 
the  aid  of  direct  taxes  and  excise. 

3.  It  is  not  true  that  the  general  government,  under  the  pres- 
ent  administration,   has  effected   any  diminution  of  the  public 
debt.     On  the  contrary,  they  have  effected  a  very  great  addition 
to  it. 

Here  then  are  no  less  than  three  mistakes  in  point  of  fact  com- 


54  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

mitted  by  Mr.  Morton  at  the  threshold  of  his  plausive  tale;  mis- 
takes which  it  is  much  easier  for  me  than  for  him  to  account  for 
his  having  committed. 

I  know  very  well  that  in  all  the  newspapers  and  party  publica- 
tions of  the  faction,  for  those  two  years,  the  falsehood  has  been 
perpetually  repeated  in  the  truth  of  detection,  that  seven  millions 
annually  were  appropriated  to  pay  off  the  principal  of  the  public 
debt.  It  is  also  known  that  on  the  2Qth  of  April,  1802,  an  act  of 
Congress  passed,  the  title  of  which  affirmed  that  it  made  provision 
for  the  payment  of  the  whole  of  the  public  debt;  but  if  Mr.  Morton 
in  the  heat  of  his  affection  for  the  present  national  order  of  things, 
will  take  upon  trust  newspaper  falsehoods,  or  the  titles  of  acts  of 
Congress,  he  must  not  expect  that  the  people  of  Massachusetts 
will  be  equally  credulous  or  equally  obsequious. 

By  the  act  of  29th  April,  1802,  the  annual  sum  of  seven  millions 
three  hundred  thousand  dollars  was  vested  in  the  Commissioners 
of  the  Sinking  Fund,  ato  be  applied  by  them  to  the  payment  of 
interest  and  charges,  and  to  the  reimbursement  or  redemption  of 
the  principal  of  the  public  debt;"  and  in  this  sum  are  included  all 
the  appropriations  which  had  before  that  time  been  made  towards 
effecting  the  same  purpose. 

Now  in  the  first  place,  appropriations  had  been  made  under  the 
former  administrations  for  the  regular  payment  of  all  the  interest 
and  for  the  reimbursement  of  the  greater  part  of  the  principal  of 
the  debt.  The  repayment,  for  example,  of  the  old  six  per  cents  and 
deferred  stock  had  been  going  on  for  years  before  this  act  of  29th 
April  was  made.  The  appropriation  of  seven  millions  then,  was 
little  or  nothing  else  than  renewing  provisions  which  had  already 
been  made. 

And  secondly,  of  this  appropriation,  a  large  portion,  being  ap- 
plied to  pay  the  interest  of  the  debt,  could  have  no  effect  to  diminish 
the  debt  itself;  since  the  interest  might  be  paid  to  the  end  of  time 
without  any  diminution  of  the  debt. 

If  seven  millions  annually  had  been  appropriated  to  the  diminu- 
tion of  the  public  debt,  it  must  of  course  have  followed  that  in  the 


iso4l  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  55 

course  of  two  years  since  the  appropriation  was  made,  fourteen 
millions  of  dollars  would  have  been  paid  off. 

But  the  President  of  the  United  States,  in  his  message  to  Con- 
gress at  the  opening  of  their  last  session,  states  that  the  amount  of 
debt  paid  in  one  year  preceding  was  "about  three  millions  one 
hundred  thousand  dollars,"  and  in  two  years  "more  than  eight 
millions  and  a  half."  A  great  part  of  this  had  been  paid  before  the 
act  of  2Qth  April,  1802,  and  consequently  was  provided  for  before 
the  pretended  annual  appropriation  of  seven  millions. 

And  by  the  report  of  the  Commissioners  of  the  Sinking  Fund, 
made  on  the  6th  day  of  February  last,  it  appears  that  of  these 
boasted  seven  millions,  nearly  five  millions  during  each  of  the  years 
1802  and  1803  were  paid  "on  account  of  the  reimbursement  and 
interest  of  the  domestic  funded  debt"  under  provisions  enacted  long 
before  Mr.  Jefferson's  administration  commenced. 

With  what  face  then  can  it  be  said  that  under  his  administration, 
the  general  government  has  appropriated  seven  millions  annually 
to  the  diminution  of  the  public  debt? 

But  whatever  the  amount  may  be  of  the  national  debt  discharged 
by  the  present  administration,  it  has  not  been  effected  without  the 
aid  of  direct  taxes  or  excise. 

In  proof  of  this,  Mr.  Morton,  please  to  look  to  the  official  ac- 
count of  receipts  and  expenditures  of  the  United  States  for  the 
year  1802,  and  you  will  find  upwards  of  six  hundred  thousand  dol- 
lars in  the  course  of  that  year  received  into  the  treasury  from  the 
produce  of  the  internal  taxes,  the  principal  part  of  which  was  ex- 
cises, and  upwards  of  two  hundred  thousand  dollars  from  the  direct 
tax.  Here  then  is  nearly  a  million  of  dollars,  which  in  the  year 
1802  aided  toward  the  payment  of  the  national  debt.  Will  you 
tell  us  that  you  only  meant  to  say  the  present  administration  had 
renounced  the  aid  of  excise  and  direct  taxes  for  the  future?  Then 
I  reply  that  you  meant  one  thing  and  said  another.  Your  asser- 
tion was,  that  the  general  government  had,  without  the  aid  of 
direct  taxes  or  excise  effected  an  important  diminution  of  the 
national  debt.  But  they  have  not  even  renounced  this  aid  for  the 


56  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

future.  In  the  last  report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  to  Con- 
gress on  the  finances,  made  the  24th  of  October  last,  he  estimates 
the  arrears  of  the  direct  tax  then  due  at  two  hundred  and  fifty 
thousand,  and  the  outstanding  internal  duties,  at  near  four  hun- 
dred thousand  dollars.  Here  then  is  upwards  of  half  a  million, 
depended  upon  as  future  aid  from  excise  and  direct  tax  to  discharge 
the  debt.  I  appeal  to  official  documents,  and  I  defy  you,  Mr.  Mor- 
ton, to  point  out  any  sense  in  which  this  part  of  your  assertion  was 
founded  in  truth. 

But  further:  It  is  not  true  that  the  present  administration  has 
effected  any  diminution  of  the  public  debt  at  all.  On  the  contrary 
they  have  added  largely  to  it. 

Let  us  take  the  President's  statement  as  correct,  and  set  down 
eight  millions  and  an  half  of  the  debt  existing  when  he  came  into 
office  as  paid.  But  of  new  debt  contracted  we  must  charge  nearly 
three  millions  payable  by  a  convention  with  Great  Britain,  and 
fifteen  millions  for  the  Louisiana  purchase.  So  for  eight  millions 
and  an  half  redeemed,  we  have  nearly  eighteen  millions  of  ac- 
cumulation, and  the  whole  debt  of  the  United  States,  which  at 
the  accession  of  Mr.  Jefferson  amounted  to  about  seventy-five, 
now  exceeds  eighty-five  millions  of  dollars.  We  shall  find  Mr.  Mor- 
ton soon  making  this  very  purchase  of  Louisiana,  one  of  his  mo- 
tives for  applause;  his  willing  admiration  flies  with  equal  alacrity 
to  greet  the  aggravation  or  the  alleviation  of  the  public  burden. 
The  value  or  the  hardness  of  the  bargain  has,  however,  no  relation 
whatever  to  the  relative  amount  of  public  debt.  That  subject  will 
be  separately  treated.  Mr.  Morton  very  well  knew  that  Louisiana 
had  saddled  this  Union  with  fifteen  millions  of  additional  debt. 
He  knew  or  ought  to  know,  that  to  pay  the  interest  on  a  part  of  it, 
seven  hundred  thousand  dollars  a  year,  raised  from  the  duties  on 
imports  and  tonnage,  are  appropriated,  and  vested  in  these  very 
Commissioners  of  the  Sinking  Fund,  who  are  the  trustees  of  his 
glorious  seven  millions;  and  he  is  now  requested  in  support  of  his 
own  credit,  to  show  any  possible  sense  in  which  it  can  consistently 
with  truth  be  said  that  the  present  administration  has  effected  a 
diminution  of  the  public  debt. 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  57 

III1 

From  the  peculiar  stress  with  which  Mr.  Morton  dwelt  upon  the 
first  article  of  his  intended  panegyric  upon  the  general  government, 
it  is  fair  to  presume  that  he  considered  the  others  as  less  important 
in  themselves,  or  less  calculated  to  produce  the  impression  he  in- 
tended; and  I  shall  therefore  bestow  less  time  in  commenting  upon 
them.  The  reduction  of  the  army  to  a  peace  establishment  was, 
indeed,  a  thing  which  on  the  complete  restoration  of  peace,  would 
have  followed,  of  course,  under  any  administration.  The  work 
had  been  chiefly  accomplished  before  Mr.  Jefferson's  elevation, 
and  in  all  probability  this  subject  would  have  slept  in  peace,  but 
for  the  opportunity  it  afforded  of  hoisting  in  that  ingenious  ex- 
ecration against  standing  armies  in  time  of  peace,  a  sentiment,  the 
justice  of  which  I  shall  not  contest,  any  more  than  the  propriety 
of  its  expression  in  any  commendation  of  Mr.  Jefferson. 

But  when  the  disposition  of  our  naval  force  and  the  Barbary 
war  are  held  up  as  objects  of  glory  to  our  general  government, 
whatever  our  candor  or  our  desire  to  approve  may  be,  we  struggle 
to  applaud  in  vain,  and  however  reluctantly,  must  say  that  in  the 
sycophant  we  lose  sight,  utterly  lose  sight  of  the  American.  What 
can  be  meant  by  the  assertion  that  we  have  dictated  terms  of  peace 
to  some  of  the  Barbary  powers,  and  rendered  harmless  the  hostility 
of  others  ?  I  say,  not  to  what  some,  but  to  what  one  of  the  Barbary 
powers  have  we  dictated  terms  of  peace.  The  treaty  between  us 
and  the  Emperor  of  Morocco  was  broken  by  one  of  his  cruisers, 
which  captured  an  American  vessel.  By  a  fortunate  accident,  and 
not  by  any  previous  disposition  by  the  government  of  our  naval 
force,  one  of  our  frigates  met  and  captured  the  Moorish  cruiser  and 
her  prize.  The  Emperor  of  Morocco  disavowed  the  act  of  hostility 
committed  by  his  cruiser;  we  restored  to  him,  without  indemnity  or 
satisfaction,  two  of  his  ships  which  we  had  in  our  possession,  and 
are  taxed  to  pay  the  captors  of  those  same  ships  their  prize  money, 
for  taking  them,  amounting  to  one-half  their  value. 

1  The  Repertory,  October  30,  1804. 


5 8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

The  statement  is  not  made  for  the  purpose  of  censuring  any  part 
of  the  proceedings  of  the  general  government  in  relation  to  the 
Emperor  of  Morocco.  Our  seamen  were  very  justly  entitled  to  the 
prize  money  for  their  captures.  But  the  simple  fact  is  that  the 
people  of  the  United  States  have  paid  many  thousand  dollars,  and 
restored  two  armed  ships;  for  what?  Why,  for  the  Emperor  of 
Morocco  to  disavow  the  violation  of  his  treaty  with  us!  Is  this 
dictating  terms  of  peace? 

But  further:  the  whole  of  these  transactions,  excepting  the  pro- 
vision for  the  payment  of  the  prize  money,  took  place,  without  a 
single  disposition  of  the  general  government  concerning  it.  The 
violation  of  the  treaty,  the  capture  of  the  Moorish  ships,  the  disa- 
vowal of  the  Emperor,  and  the  restoration  of  his  cruisers  to  him,  all 
took  place  before  the  government  had  a  suspicion  of  a  rupture  with 
Morocco.  Undoubtedly  the  most  honorable  credit  is  due  to  the 
Captains  Bainbridge  and  Rodgers  and  their  gallant  companions, 
for  the  capture  of  the  Moorish  ships;  and  their  restoration  by  the 
consul,  Mr.  Simpson,  to  obtain  the  recognition  of  the  old  treaty, 
was,  as  the  President  justly  styles  it,  "temperate  and  correct  con- 
duct." But  it  must  be  a  braggart  temper,  indeed,  which  can  boast 
of  such  an  accommodation,  as  dictating  terms  of  peace. 

If  this  idle  rodomontade  is  a  reflection  upon  the  modesty  of  the 
nation,  the  other  part  of  the  assertion,  that  the  general  government 
has  rendered  harmless  the  hostility  of  other  Barbary  powers,  is  an 
insult  upon  the  calamities  of  our  countrymen.  What!  when  by  the 
hostilities  of  the  very  meanest  of  those  powers  we  have  lost  one  of 
the  best  frigates  in  the  navy.  When  her  brave  commander,  and 
four  hundred  of  our  fellow  citizens  are  languishing  in  captivity  at 
Tripoli,  are  we  to  be  told  that  their  chains  are  rivetted  by  harmless 
hostilities?  When  nearly  a  million  of  dollars  a  year  have  just  been 
added  to  the  burdens  upon  our  commerce,  for  a  Mediterranean 
fund,  to  support  the  dispositions  now  first  made  of  an  efficient 
armament  against  those  paltry  pirates,  is  it  a  time  to  talk  of  having 
rendered  their  hostilities  harmless?  We  read  of  the  Emperor 
Caligula,  that  he  made  a  triumphal  entry  at  Rome,  because  he 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  59 

had  picked  up  cockle  shells  on  the  beach  of  the  German  ocean;  Mr. 
Morton  improves  upon  the  ideas  of  Caligula,  and  goes  to  the  dun- 
geons of  Africa  to  pluck  laurels  for  the  brows  of  Mr.  Jefferson. 

Of  the  purchase  of  Louisiana  I  shall  not  now  undertake  to  dis- 
cuss the  policy.  That  it  is  a  great  and  important  feature  of  Mr. 
Jefferson's  administration  is  unquestionably  true.  Whether  it 
will  prove  a  blessing  or  a  curse  to  this  Union,  it  is  only  future  time 
that  can  determine.  This  much  we  know,  that  the  price  of  the 
purchase  will  be  paid  almost  entirely  by  the  Eastern  and  Atlantic 
states.  Thus  much  we  know,  that  when  admitted  as  members  of 
the  Union,  the  whole  weight  and  power  of  the  purchased  territories 
will  be  thrown  into  the  scale  of  southern  and  western  influence.  In 
the  relative  situation  of  the  United  States,  New  England  and  the 
Maritime  States  have  been  constantly  declining  in  power  and  con- 
sequence; they  must  continue  to  decline  in  proportion  as  the  growth 
of  the  southern  and  western  parts  shall  be  more  rapid  than  theirs. 
This  vibration  of  the  centre  of  power,  being  founded  in  nature, 
cannot  be  resisted,  and  as  good  citizens  it  is  our  duty  to  acquiesce 
in  the  event;  but  to  this  increasing  ascendancy  of  the  south  and 
west,  the  acquisition  of  Louisiana  adds  an  immense  force,  never 
contemplated  in  the  original  compact  of  these  states.  We  are 
still  to  learn  whether  this  excessive  southern  preponderance  will 
be  enjoyed  with  moderation,  or  used  with  generosity.  Should  it 
prove  otherwise,  and  the  present  symptoms  are  by  no  means  favor- 
able, the  people  of  America  will  have  no  cause  to  thank  Mr.  JefTer- 
son  for  his  Louisiana  bargain.  New  England  particularly,  the  dupe 
of  her  own  good  nature,  will  find  that  she  has  been  made  to  bear 
the  charge  of  aggrandizing  a  rival  interest,  for  the  degradation  of 
her  own.  We  are  willing  to  hope  for  better  things;  but  while  the 
cost  of  the  Louisiana  purchase  hangs  like  a  mill  stone  upon  the 
neck  of  our  commerce;  and  while  all  its  advantages  are  in  fallacious 
hope  and  precarious  conjecture,  it  is  not  a  time  for  New  England 
men  especially  to  celebrate  as  an  achievement  deserving  their 
gratitude,  a  measure  of  so  very  problematical  an  issue. 

In  arriving  at  the  last  specific  item  of  Mr.  Morton's  eulogium, 


60  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

which  speaks  of  our  government's  "  desire  to  remain  in  peace  with 
all  the  belligerent  nations  of  Europe,  and  their  firmness  to  vindicate 
the  rights  of  our  citizens  against  the  aggressions  of  any,"  we  are 
at  a  loss  to  imagine  to  what  solitary  fact  his  words  can  possibly 
bear  an  allusion.  The  desire  to  remain  at  peace  with  all  the  nations 
of  Europe  but  one  has,  indeed,  been  conspicuous  enough;  but  their 
firmness  to  vindicate  our  rights!  Where  has  it  ever  been  mani- 
fested. There  is  but  one  way  of  accounting  for  Mr.  Morton's  in- 
ferences from  facts,  and  that  may  be  called,  the  rule  of  inverse 
deduction;  or  the  rule  of  making  inferences  in  direct  contradiction 
to  their  premises.  Or  to  adopt  the  words  of  Hudibas, 

As  by  the  way  of  innuendo 
Lucus  is  made  a  non  lucendo. 

Thus  when  Mr.  Livingston  in  a  public  memorial  formally  pro- 
poses that  France  and  the  United  States  should  make  a  common 
cause  against  Great  Britain,  Mr.  Morton  thinks  it  an  indisputable 
proof  of  our  government's  desire  to  remain  at  peace  with  all  the 
world.  Mr.  Monroe,  as  far  as  any  part  of  his  negotiations  is  known 
to  the  public,  is  constantly  giving  similar  proofs  of  a  pacific  disposi- 
tion. The  treatment  of  the  British  minister  at  Washington  has 
been  exactly  conformable  to  such  indications,  and  Mr.  Livingston, 
to  place  this  desire  of  peace  beyond  all  question,  has  recently  re- 
peated an  outrageous  insult  upon  the  British  government. 

On  the  other  hand  what  rights  of  our  citizens  has  the  govern- 
ment vindicated  against  any  aggressions?  Mr.  Morton  says  our 
commerce  is  less  interrupted,  and  says  it  at  the  very  moment  when 
foreign  armed  ships,  both  English  and  French,  have  violated  our 
own  territorial  rights,  and  taken  men  from  our  merchant  vessels, 
men  within  our  own  harbors.  Never  since  the  United  States  have 
been  an  independent  nation,  never  have  they  been  so  grossly  in- 
sulted; and  what  satisfaction  has  our  government  obtained?  What 
satisfaction  could  they  ask?  When  every  article  of  complaint  they 
could  advance  might  be  retorted  with  tenfold  recrimination  upon 
themselves. 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  61 

We  have  waded  through  the  sickening  detail  of  Mr.  Morton's 
praises,  and  shall  have  but  little  to  remark  when  he  comes  to  gen- 
eralize. It  is  so  easy  to  say  that  the  objects  and  pursuits  of  the 
government  have  been  one  continued  effort  to  promote  the  faith, 
justice  and  honor  of  the  nation;  and  the  peace,  security  and  hap- 
piness of  all  its  citizens.  It  is  sc  easy  to  say  all  this  without  convey- 
ing or  even  forming  any  fixed  or  determinate  idea,  that  we  may  con- 
sider the  object  of  those  words  to  be  rather  to  round  a  period, 
than  to  have  any  meaning.  To  all  general  encomium  on  this  ad- 
ministration, the  destruction  of  the  judiciary,  and  the  system  of 
political  removals  from  office,  must  forever  remain  insuperable  ob- 
jections. The  first  has  overthrown  all  confidence  in  the  stability 
of  justice,  and  the  second  has  given  the  pernicious  example  of  set- 
ting up  the  government  as  the  prize  and  the  instrument  of  faction. 
These  two  corrupted  streams,  issuing  from  the  same  fountain,  will 
spread  their  pestilence  over  this  Union,  beyond  the  lapse  of  ages 
to  purify.  They  have  entailed  a  curse  upon  our  posterity,  which 
the  blessings  of  a  thousand  Louisianas  will  never  compensate. 

Such  then  being  the  materials  of  which  Mr.  Morton's  motion 
consisted,  it  is  not  at  all  surprising  that  when  its  accuracy  was  once 
becoming  a  subject  of  discus-sion,  he  should  have  shrunk  from  the 
test  and  withdrawn  it  from  the  scrutiny  of  his  opponents.  But  it 
still  remains  for  him  to  account  for  having  produced  a  rhapsody  so 
grossly  variant  from  the  truth,  and  so  abhorrent  to  the  sentiments 
of  the  legislature  and  people  of  Massachusetts.  It  appears  that  he 
withdrew  the  motion  on  consultation  with  some  members  of  his 
own  party.  This  is  thus  far  honorable  to  them;  since  it  shows  that 
they  were  not  prepared  to  go  with  him  into  the  rapturous  regions 
of  romance,  for  the  purpose  of  daubing  Mr.  Jefferson  with  un- 
merited flattery;  but  why  did  he  produce  it?  Was  it  to  operate  as 
a  letter  of  recommendation  for  himself;  as  a  passport  to  office  from 
which  some  honest  man  must  be  turned  out?  Or  was  it  to  pro- 
pitiate the  evil  genius  of  Mr.  John  Randolph  to  the  Yazoo  claim- 
ants of  Georgia  lands  ?  If  the  former  was  his  motive,  he  may  per- 
haps have  reason  for  his  hopes.  We  have  seen  services  of  a  similar 


62  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

character  very  lately  rewarded  by  the  office  of  Commissioner  of 
Loans;  and  there  are  still  a  few  federalists  of  unimpeachable  worth, 
who  may  be  thrown  breadless  upon  the  world  to  accommodate 
candidates  of  such  exemplary  fervor.  But  as  to  the  Yazoo  pur- 
chasers, they  may  rest  assured  that  ferocity  will  give  as  little,  or 
less  aid  to  their  cause  than  its  justice.  Mr.  John  Randolph's 
opposition  is  not  thus  to  be  appeased  or  overpowered,  and  the  next 
winter  as  the  last,  their  agents  will  have  the  most  indisputable 
proofs  of  Mr.  Jefferson's  favoring  their  claims;  but  it  will  so  happen 
that  they  will  again  be  set  aside.  Desirous  as  Mr.  Jefferson  may 
be  to  have  justice  done,  severe  as  his  one  continued  effort  may  be 
for  their  relief,  it  can  only  be  obtained  by  the  vote  of  both  houses 
of  Congress,  and  the  world  knows  how  little  influence  he  has  over 
them.  Mr.  John  Randolph  knows  very  well  when  to  oppose  a  mo- 
tion "from  whatever  quarter  of  the  House  it  may  come,"  and  if 
on  any  improper  occasion  Mr.  Jefferson's  influence  should  be  in 
hazard  of  weighing  too  much  in  the  House,  his  own  sons-in-law 
will  take  care  to  restore  the  balance.  The  sins  of  a  first  purchaser 
will  be  visited  upon  all  the  subsequent  assignees,  and  the  corrup- 
tions of  a  Georgia  legislature  will  be  punished  by  the  spoils  of  New- 
England  claimants.  Grant,  however,  that  the  issue  should  be 
more  favorable  to  their  claim,  grant  that  the  services  of  so  zealous 
a  partisan  should  find  favor  in  the  sight  of  the  national  rulers,  it 
is  obvious  that  the  motives  which  led  to  such  flaming  panegyrics  as 
those  of  Mr.  Morton's  motion  are  partial,  are  private,  are  personal, 
that  they  relate  only  to  particular  interests,  and  are  in  unequivocal 
hostility  to  the  interests  of  the  people. 

No.  IV  1 

The  second  occasion  upon  which  the  Virginian  faction  in  the  late 
session  of  the  State  legislature  displayed  their  determination  to 
sacrifice  the  interests  of  the  State  to  the  purposes  of  Mr.  Jefferson, 

1  The  Repertory,  November  2,  1804. 


i8o4I  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  63 

was  in  their  conduct  respecting  the  mode  of  choosing  electors  of 
President  and  Vice  President.  That  the  choice  should  be  made  by 
the  people  was  agreed  on  all  sides;  but  whether  by  a  general  ticket, 
where  the  whole  people  should  vote  for  the  whole  electoral  body 
of  the  State,  or  whether  by  separate  districts,  conformably  to  the 
mode  of  choosing  members  for  the  national  House  of  Representa- 
tives, was  made  a  question  upon  which  one  would  have  thought  the 
faction  deemed  their  whole  salvation  to  depend. 

The  difference  in  point  of  principle,  between  the  two  modes  of 
election  was  not  worth  a  cavil.  But  the  difference  in  the  result  was 
obvious.  Had  the  choice  by  districts  prevailed,  it  was  contem- 
plated that  a  proportion  of  partisans  of  Mr.  Jefferson  would  be 
chosen  among  the  electors,  perhaps  nearly  equal  to  that  he  has  in 
the  House  of  Representatives.  The  body  would  be  divided  against 
itself,  and  the  voice  of  Massachusetts  in  the  choice  of  President  of 
the  United  States  would  be  annihilated.  A  general  ticket  they 
knew  would  give  the  clear,  full,  and  unequivocal  voice  of  the  State, 
and  that  voice  the  faction  knew  was  not  in  their  favor.  They 
dreaded  to  hear  it,  and  they  struggled  with  all  their  violence  and 
all  their  cunning  to  evade  it.  Hence,  after  attempting  in  every 
shape  and  form  to  defeat  the  resolution  for  choosing  by  a  general 
ticket,  they  concluded  their  career  of  opposition  by  offering  in  each 
House  a  protest  against  it,  assigning  no  less  than  nine  reasons  for 
their  preference  of  district  elections  over  a  general  ticket.  That 
this  measure  was  concerted  by  the  leaders  of  the  faction  in  both 
Houses  is  apparent  from  the  sameness  of  their  pretended  reasons; 
but  so  extreme  was  the  violence  and  indecency  of  the  language 
used  in  the  protest  offered  to  the  House,  that  many  of  the  members, 
who  by  a  misplaced  confidence  had  signed  the  paper  without  know- 
ing its  contents,  declared  their  [disapprobation  of  them  when  they 
discovered  what  they  were,  and  although  the  signatures  amounted 
to  101,  only  53  voted  for  inserting  the  protest  on  the  journals  of 
the  House. 

As  the  reasons  alleged  were  not  the  real  operative  reasons,  their 
weakness  makes  it  almost  superfluous  to  refute  them.  Let  us, 


64  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

however,  as  briefly  as  possible  notice  the  arguments  which  are 
given  to  the  world  in  justification  of  those  intemperate  protests. 

First.  It  is  said  that  the  elector  ought  to  know  the  character  and 
sentiments  of  the  candidate  for  whom  he  votes, — which  is  impossi- 
ble in  so  extensive  a  territory  as  this  State;  and  then  the  protest  of 
the  Senate  goes  on  to  define  the  boundaries  of  the  Commonwealth, 
and  tells  the  good  people,  how  many  original  colonies,  judiciary 
districts,  counties,  towns,  and  individual  souls  it  contains. 

But  there  can  be  no  imaginary  difficulty  in  the  selection  of  nine- 
teen persons  throughout  the  Commonwealth,  whose  character  and 
sentiments  will  be  sufficiently  known  to  all  the  electors  for  every 
necessary  purpose  of  such  an  election  as  this.  If  the  office  elected 
to  were  of  a  nature  to  require  particular  talents,  or  the  exertion  of  a 
peculiar  character,  as  of  a  representative,  a  senator,  a  county  treas- 
urer, or  a  selectman,  there  would  be  some  color  for  this  objection. 
But  in  this  case  the  persons  chosen  have  but  one  act  to  perform, 
and  that  is  to  vote.  They  are  merely  the  proxies  of  the  people  to 
deliver  the  suffrage  which  they  cannot  conveniently  give  them- 
selves, and  the  only  quality  which  the  primary  elector  is  interested 
to  know  of  the  candidate  is,  for  whom  he  will  vote.  Now  I  do  not 
hesitate  to  say,  that  this  will  in  the  general  course  of  things,  be  at 
least  as  well,  and  perhaps  better  ascertained  by  a  general  ticket, 
than  by  a  choice  in  districts.  In  the  first  formation  of  the  tickets 
recommended  by  the  parties,  each  of  them  will  undoubtedly  select 
such  men  as  will  be  known  to  possess  the  weight  and  influence 
proper  to  promote  the  success  of  the  ticket  in  his  district,  and  at 
the  same  time  men  whose  opinions  have  been  so  clearly  pronounced 
as  to  leave  no  doubt  of  the  complexion  of  their  votes.  The  unity  of 
object  and  of  exertion  throughout  the  State  will  give  a  more  pointed 
energy  to  the  support  of  every  individual  candidate.  The  pro- 
testers themselves  will  find  none  of  the  difficulty  which  they  al- 
lege, nor  will  their  adherents  have  any  of  that  ignorance  of  the 
character  and  sentiments  of  those  candidates  for  whom  they 
will  vote,  which  they  so  pathetically  deplore.  If  their  ticket 
should  fail  of  success,  it  will  not  be  for  want  of  certain  knowl- 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  65 

edge  how  their  candidates  would  discharge  the  duties  assigned 
them. 

Second.  Election  by  a  general  ticket  is  said  to  be  repugnant  to 
the  habits  and  usages  of  the  people.  But  the  national  convention 
itself,  under  which  this  election  first  originated,  is  so  recent  in  date, 
that  no  usage  can  be  predicated  upon  it.  The  election  has  hitherto 
occurred  but  four  times,  and  has  not  been  uniform  in  mode.  The 
whole  people  have  always  voted  in  this  manner  for  the  two  highest 
executive  officers  of  the  State,  and  in'one  instance  for  a  member  of 
Congress.  Every  county  annually  chooses  its  senators  by  a  gen- 
eral ticket.  So  that  this  mode  of  election  is  perfectly  familiar  to 
the  people  throughout  the  Commonwealth,  and  there  can  be  no 
more  difficulty  in  forming  or  delivering  a  ticket  of  nineteen  names 
selected  from  the  whole  State,  than  a  ticket  of  five  or  six  names 
selected  from  a  whole  county. 

Third.  ''Because  this  mode  is  calculated  to  open  the  door  to 
intrigue  and  imposition  on  the  people." 

The  protesters  have  not  explained  their  grounds  for  this  asser- 
tion, which  is  merely  matter  of  opinion.  Without  contesting  their 
skill  and  experience  on  this  head,  it  may  be  observed  that  this  mode 
of  election  has  been  sanctioned  by  all  the  principal  States,  in  which 
their  party  predominates.  The  doors  of  intrigue  and  imposition 
will  be  open  in  every  mode  of  election  to  a  people  that  will  tolerate 
them;  but  on  general  principles  it  is  more  natural  to  infer,  that 
these  corrupt  engines  lose  their  efficacy  in  proportion  as  the  num- 
ber of  voters  is  increased. 

Fourth.  This  mode  of  election  is  fallacious,  because  the  candi- 
date selected  from  any  given  district  may  vote  contrary  to  the 
wishes  of  a  majority  in  that  district. 

The  selection  of  a  candidate  from  each  of  the  seventeen  districts 
which  elect  a  member  to  Congress  must  have  been  for  the  purpose 
of  distributing  equally  throughout  the  Commonwealth  the  honors 
of  an  important  appointment;  an  example  which  the  general  gov- 
ernment, in  their  one  continued  effort  for  the  happiness  of  all,  have 
yet  to  learn.  As  each  elector  will  be  an  elector  for  the  whole  Com- 


66  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

monwealth,  undoubtedly  the  partial  majorities  of  single  districts 
will  merge  in  the  general  majority  of  the  whole  State.  It  will  not 
array  the  vote  of  one  county  against  the  vote  of  another,  and  thus 
reduce  the  influence  of  the  Commonwealth  to  a  level  with  that  of 
the  smallest  State  in  the  Union;  but  will  give  to  Massachusetts  her 
full  constitutional  weight.  This  is  no  fallacy.  The  fallacy  would 
be  in  such  a  difference  of  the  modes  of  election,  that  while  all  the 
southern  States  take  care  to  give  unanimous  votes,  the  people  of 
Massachusetts  should  be  amused  with  a  mere  show  of  voting,  and 
in  fact  have  no  voice  at  all. 

Fifth.  This  objection  included  so  gross  and  pointed  an  insult 
upon  the  majority  of  the  legislature,  that  it  was  finally  disavowed 
by  many  of  the  signers  themselves;  nor  have  they  chosen  to  publish 
it  with  the  rest. 

Sixth.  This  is  a  repetition  in  other  words  of  the  fourth  objection. 
A  complaint  that  one  party,  meaning  their  own  party,  will  be  de- 
prived of  their  due  weight  in  the  election.  But  that  party  will  have 
much  more  than  its  due  weight,  by  securing  to  themselves  the  whole 
weight  of  such  States  as  Virginia,  Pennsylvania  and  New  York. 
The  language  of  those  gentlemen  is,  where  we  are  the  minority  we 
must  have  our  full  proportion,  and  where  we  are  the  majority  we 
will  have  all. 

Seventh.  This  mode  of  election,  it  is  supposed,  will  have  a 
tendency  to  excite  heats  and  animosities;  and  to  disturb  the  har- 
mony and  tranquillity  of  the  State. 

This  is  another  conjectural  objection.  It  is  just  as  easy  and  much 
more  agreeable  to  anticipate  that  it  will  be  productive  of  more 
harmony  and  lead  to  unanimity.  It  seems  much  more  probable 
that  an  obstinate  and  persevering  attempt  to  degrade  the  State,  to 
destroy  its  influence  in  the  Union,  and  to  reduce  its  condition  in 
the  political  orb,  from  that  of  a  primary  planet,  to  that  of  the 
meanest  of  satellites,  should  produce  discord  and  irritation. 

Then  come  the  two  reasons  why  the  protesters  prefer  the  elec- 
tion by  districts.  These  are  only  repetitions  of  some  of  those 
before  adduced  as  objections  against  the  mode  which  prevailed. 


i8o4]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  67 

Such  are  the  arguments,  if  arguments  they  can  be  called,  by 
which  a  large  minority  in  both  branches  of  your  legislature,  fellow 
citizens  of  Massachusetts,  varnished  the  attempt  to  deprive  you 
of  your  constitutional  suffrage,  at  the  approaching  election  of 
President  and  Vice  President.  For  this  was  the  undoubted  real 
motive  and  design  in  this  attempt.  They  know  that  if  your  opinion 
should  be  fully  and  fairly  taken,  it  would  be  against  their  party 
measures,  party  projects,  and  party  candidates.  They  wished 
therefore  to  drown  your  voice  altogether.  It  was  impossible  for 
them  to  give  a  more  convincing  proof  that  their  attachment  to  their 
faction  overpowers  their  attachment  to  the  Commonwealth. 

In  order  to  set  this  observation  in  its  true  light  and  to  show  its 
full  importance,  we  must  again  remark,  that  if  the  mode  of  choos- 
ing electors  by  single  districts  were  established  throughout  the 
Union,  Mr.  Jefferson  and  his  administration  would  lose  so  many 
electors,  that  his  re-election  would  be  doubtful  in  the  highest  de- 
gree. It  is  at  least  certain  that  they  dared  not  make  the  experi- 
ment. For  when  the  amendment  to  the  Constitution  which  was 
carried  through  Congress  last  winter  to  secure  the  re-election, 
Mr.  Huger,  a  warm  federalist  moved,  on  the  2Oth  of  October,  at 
the  very  commencement  of  the  session,  as  a  further  amendment 
to  be  sent  out  to  the  State  legislatures  with  the  other: 

"That  the  State  legislatures  shall  from  time  to  time,  divide  each 
State  into  districts,  equal  to  the  whole  number  of  senators  and 
representatives  from  each  State  in  the  Congress  of  the  United 
States;  and  shall  direct  the  mode  of  choosing  an  elector  of  President 
and  Vice  President  in  each  of  the  said  districts,  who  shall  be  chosen 
by  citizens  having  the  qualifications  requisite  for  electors  of  the 
most  numerous  branch  of  the  State  legislature;  and  that  the  dis- 
tricts so  to  be  constituted  shall  consist,  as  nearly  as  may  be,  of 
contiguous  territory,  and  of  equal  proportion  of  population,  except 
where  there  may  be  any  detached  portion  of  territory,  not  of  it- 
self sufficient  to  form  a  district,  which  then  shall  be  annexed  to 
some  other  portion  nearest  thereto;  which  districts,  when  so 
-divided,  shall  remain  unalterable  until  a  new  census  of  the  United 
States  shall  be  taken." 

Here  we  see  this  very  measure  of  voting  for  electors  by  single 


68  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

districts,  proposed  as  a  general  measure  to  operate  throughout  the 
United  States.  But  observe,  it  was  brought  forward  by  a  federalist; 
for  although  the  legislature  of  New  York  had  expressly  instructed 
their  senators  to  propose  this  very  amendment  with  the  other, 
those  senators  had  obeyed  only  one-half  their  instructions.  They 
brought  forward  the  discriminating  amendment,  and  passed  over 
the  other  in  total  silence. 

Mr.  Huger's  motion  was  committed  to  the  same  committee  who 
had  the  other  under  consideration,  but  they  did  not  act  upon  it  at 
all;  and  although  Mr.  Huger  pressed  the  subject  as  often  as  he 
could  during  the  session,  he  never  could  prevail  upon  the  majority 
in  the  House  of  Representatives,  so  much  as  to  discuss  his  motion; 
and  on  the  2d  of  March,  when  he  moved  that  it  might  be  referred 
to  a  committee  of  the  whole,  his  request,  though  supported  by  all 
the  federal  members,  was  negatived. 

I  intreat  you,  fellow  citizens,  to  compare  this  conduct  of  the 
same  faction  so  nearly  at  the  same  time,  in  the  national  House  of 
Representatives,  and  in  your  State  legislature.  The  only  manner 
possible  whereby  a  choice  of  electors  by  single  districts  can  be  made 
to  operate  fairly  and  equally  throughout  the  Union,  is  that  it 
should  be  uniformly  established.  Yet  when  this  is  proposed  in  an 
assembly,  where  Mr.  Jefferson's  majority  is  all  powerful,  a  member 
of  the  most  respectable  character,  backed  by  the  instructions  of 
one  of  the  first  legislatures  in  the  Union,  is  refused  even  the  dis- 
cussion of  the  proposal;  and  at  the  same  time  your  own  legislature 
cannot  secure  to  you  the  very  same  advantage,  to  which  Mr. 
Jefferson's  partisans  so  tenaciously  adhere.  Where  they  hold  it, 
they  cannot  place  you  on  the  same  footing  with  your  Virginian 
fellow  citizens,  without  being  grossly  insulted,  and  without  pro- 
tests of  your  own  servants  against  this  your  enjoyment  of  equal 
rights. 


iso4]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  69 

V1 

To  an  impartial  spectator  of  passing  events,  the  movements  of 
political  factions  in  a  free  government  are  always  objects  of  curious 
and  interesting  speculation.  In  countries  approaching  so  near  a 
democracy  as  these  United  States,  it  must  ever  be  the  primary  ob- 
ject for  the  leaders  of  party  to  court  the  favor  of  the  people.  There 
are  two  modes  of  accomplishing  this  with  success;  one  of  which 
consists  in  rendering  real  service  to  the  public,  and  the  other  by 
professing  extraordinary  solicitude  for  the  people,  by  flattering 
their  prejudices,  by  ministering  to  their  passions,  and  by  humoring 
their  transient  and  changeable  opinions.  These  two  processes  for 
the  attainment  of  the  same  object,  are  scarcely  ever  combined  to- 
gether, and  as  the  ambitious  and  aspiring  must  universally  be 
impelled  to  aim  at  the  end,  so  the  choice  of  the  means  takes  its 
complexion  from  the  individual  character  of  every  candidate  for 
power  through  popularity.  In  times  of  national  difficulty  and 
distress,  when  the  service  of  the  public  is  a  service  of  danger  and  of 
toil,  when  deeds  are  the  only  test  of  attachment  to  the  country, 
and  mere  words  are  estimated  at  their  proper  worth,  the  patriot  by 
action  generally  obtains  the  ascendancy;  but  in  days  of  peace  and 
tranquillity,  when  the  duties  of  public  life  are  little  more  than  a 
routine,  when  honor  without  peril,  and  profit  without  sacrifice  is 
the  result  of  public  employment,  then  the  patriot  by  profession 
takes  his  turn,  and  often  bears  away  the  palm  from  his  more  re- 
served and  unassuming  competitor. 

This  distinction  between  the  patriot  by  profession  and  the  patriot 
by  action  could  not  be  better  illustrated  than  in  the  contrast  be- 
tween the  struggle  for  a  general  ticket,  upon  which  in  my  late 
numbers  I  have  animadverted,  and  the  effort  of  the  same  party  in 
opposition  to  Mr.  Ely's  motion.  We  have  seen  on  the  former  occa- 
sion great  professions  of  regard  for  the  people.  We  have  seen  a 

1  The  Repertory,  November  6, 1804.  The  subject  of  this  paper  is  more  fully  treated 
in  the  remarks  delivered,  or  intended  to  be  delivered,  in  the  Senate  when  the  in- 
structions of  the  State  of  Massachusetts  were  laid  before  that  body.  See  p.  87, 
infra. 


70  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

minority  in  the  legislature  undertaking  to  say  that  the  people  pre- 
ferred election  by  districts,  because  they  preferred  it  themselves, 
and  formally  assigning  this  preference  of  the  people,  as  one  of  the 
conclusive  reasons  for  their's,  when  the  people  had  never  mani- 
fested, and  probably  never  entertained  such  a  sentiment.  This 
was  patriotism  by  profession.  The  protesters  take  for  granted 
that  the  people  like  their  project  best,  and  then  make  a  merit  of 
advocating  it  for  that  reason.  When  Mr.  Ely  brought  forward  his 
motion,  the  object  of  which  was  to  render  the  people  a  real  service, 
a  great  and  important  service,  then  these  flaming  wordy  patriots 
lost  all  their  zeal,  and  instead  of  supporting  it  with  that  genuine 
devotion  to  the  interests  of  the  people,  which  they  had  so  recently 
trumpeted  abroad,  either  slunk  from  the  discharge  of  their  duty, 
and  their  vote  as  legislators,  or  attempted  to  check  by  insidious 
amendment,  or  by  open  opposition,  a  measure  of  the  deepest 
moment  to  the  welfare  of  the  people.  The  reasons  upon  which  are 
grounded  the  instruction  for  which  Mr.  Ely  moved  are  so  clear,  so 
strong,  and  so  indisputable,  that  no  direct  answer  to  them  has 
been  attempted  either  in  the  legislature,  or  in  the  newspaper  specu- 
lations which  have  appeared  on  the  subject.  The  rule  of  represen- 
tation prescribed  by  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  is 
universally  admitted  to  be  unequal,  and  when  combined  with  the 
practice  under  the  Constitution  is  oppressive  on  all  the  States 
holding  few  or  no  slaves.  At  present  the  people  of  the  United 
States  consist  of  two  classes.  A  privileged  order  of  slave-holding 
Lords,  and  a  race  of  men  degraded  to  a  lower  station,  merely  be- 
cause they  are  not  slave-holders.  Every  planter  south  of  the 
Potomac  has  one  vote  for  himself,  and  three  votes  in  effect  for 
every  five  slaves  he  keeps  in  bondage;  while  a  New  England  farmer, 
who  contributes  tenfold  as  much  to  the  support  of  the  government, 
has  only  a  single  vote.  Our  share  of  representation  is  only  pro- 
portionate to  numbers;  their  share  is  in  the  same  proportion  of 
numbers,  and  their  property  is  represented  besides.  At  the  time 
when  the  Constitution  was  formed,  this  provision  was  submitted 
to  on  the  ground  that  the  burden  of  taxation  should  be  apportioned 


i8o4]  JOHN  QUINCE  ADAMS  71 

to  the  benefit  of  representation.  The  experience  of  fifteen  years, 
however,  has  proved  the  error  of  these  calculations.  The  expe- 
rience of  fifteen  years  has  proved  that  four-fifths  of  the  burdens  of 
this  government  must  be  supported  by  the  States  which  have  no 
representation  for  slaves.  The  benefit  pledged  to  us  as  compensa- 
tion for  inadequate  taxation  is  not  secured  to  us.  We  are  doubly 
taxed,  and  they  are  doubly  represented. 

The  necessary  consequence  of  this  has  been  the  loss  of  all  our 
weight  and  influence  in  the  Councils  of  the  Union.  It  is  a  fact  well 
ascertained  that  this  excess  of  southern  representation  decided  the 
fate  of  the  last  election  for  President  and  Vice  President  of  the 
United  States;  the  same  event  must  inevitably  follow  every  contest 
in  which  the  interests  of  the  North  and  those  of  the  South  shall  be 
at  variance.  While  the  present  system  of  representation  continues, 
an  even  balance  in  the  national  councils  must  not  be  expected. 
The  slave  representation,  like  the  sword  of  Brennus,  will  forever 
be  thrown  into  the  Southern  scale,  and  must  forever  make  our's 
kick  the  beam. 

In  a  moral  and  political  view,  this  representation  of  slaves  is 
alike  objectionable.  The  number  of  those  miserable  beings  al- 
ready existing  in  some  States  is  such  as  to  occasion  the  most  serious 
alarm  in  all  humane  and  thinking  minds.  Mr.  Jefferson  has  said 
that  the  populace  of  large  cities  no  more  add  strength  to  the  body 
politic,  than  sores  to  the  body  natural.  If  this  comparison  be  just 
the  slaves  of  our  southern  neighbors  are  abscesses  of  the  deepest 
and  most  dangerous  matter  to  our  national  body.  Instead  of 
strength  they  are  distemper,  deadly  distemper,  which  if  it  cannot 
be  eradicated,  ought  at  least  not  to  be  fostered  and  stimulated. 
By  allowing  representation  for  slaves,  we  encourage  and  reward 
the  infamous  traffic  of  human  flesh;  and  accordingly  we  find  that 
although  at  one  period  this  traffic  was  prohibited  in  all  our  States, 
yet  the  temptation  to  allow  it  has  already  overpowered  every  other 
consideration  in  South  Carolina,  and  she  has  opened  all  her  ports 
to  that  disgraceful  trade. 

It  will  not  be  necessary  at  this  day  to  prove  that  in  the  eye  of 


72  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

morality  this  purchase  and  sale  of  man  is  criminal.  The  laws  of 
the  United  States  have  long  since  declared  it  so,  and  as  such  it  is 
prohibited  to  every  citizen  of  the  United  States  on  the  severest 
penalties.  Thus  the  Constitution  instigates  and  urges  the  South- 
ern States  to  that  which  the  laws  punish  as  a  crime.  It  makes  the 
highest  privilege  of  freemen  the  purchase  of  accumulated  slavery. 
It  says  to  the  Northern  and  navigating  States,  you  shall  not  trade 
in  slaves.  If  you  do,  your  ships  and  their  cargoes  shall  be  confis- 
cated, your  estates  shall  be  ruined  by  fines,  and  your  persons  shall 
be  buried  in  dungeons;  and  at  the  same  breath  it  says  to  the 
Southern  States,  deal  in  slaves,  multiply  the  fetters  of  your  bond- 
age, and  for  every  five  victims  of  avarice  and  cruelty,  you  import 
within  your  territories,  you  shall  have  an  increase  of  three  votes 
towards  composing  the  legislative  and  executive  authorities  of  the 
nation.  For  in  the  very  same  act  it  offers  a  bounty  to  one  citizen, 
while  it  brandishes  the  scourge  over  another.  Can  anything  be 
more  inhuman?  Can  anything  be  more  absurd? 

Thus  in  whatever  point  of  view  we  contemplate  this  provision 
in  the  Constitution,  whether  as  moralists,  as  politicians,  or  as  citi- 
zens, it  calls  aloud  for  amendment.  Yet  in  the  legislature  of 
Massachusetts  itself  were  found  men  who  made  the  most  formal 
and  pointed  opposition  against  a  fair  and  constitutional  attempt 
to  obtain  this  amendment.  And  what  were  the  arguments  they 
alleged?  They  were  worthy  of  the  cause  in  which  they  were  ad- 
vanced. 

They  said,  that  it  might  perhaps  give  offense  to  Virginia  and  the 
slave-holding  States,  and  thus  endanger  the  existence  of  the 
Union. 

But  surely  propositions  of  amendment  to  the  Constitution  can 
give  no  offense  to  those  States  whose  most  influential  characters 
have  been  and  still  are  clamorous  for  amendments  much  more 
calculated  to  strike  at  the  existence  of  the  Union;  who  are  con- 
tinually telling  us  that  the  Constitution  not  only  permits,  but  in- 
vites proposals  of  amendment;  who  have  just  accomplished  one 
which  they  deemed  essential  to  the  increase  of  their  own  power; 


i8o4]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  73 

and  who  have  announced  their  determination  tc  accomplish  others, 
still  more  contrariant  to  the  principles  upon  which  that  compact 
was  originally  settled. 

This  fear  of  giving  offense  by  the  exercise  of  an  indisputable  right, 
under  the  sanction  of  every  inducement  which  justice,  humanity, 
and  liberty  can  inspire,  is  a  motive  which  ought  not  to  be  urged 
upon  freemen.  It  is  an  appeal  to  weakness,  a  plea  to  cowardice, 
an  argument  fit  only  for  slaves  to  utter  and  to  hear.  It  discovers  a 
mind  prepared  for  every  degree  of  submission.  It  is  language  of 
a  negro  driver  on  a  plantation,  to  the  wretches  who  tremble  under 
his  lash;  but  it  can  find  no  accessible  corner  in  the  heart  of  a  New 
England  farmer. 

The  pretense  of  danger  to  the  Union  cannot  be  credited  by  those 
who  raise  it.  The  amendment,  when  proposed  in  Congress,  will 
be  adopted  or  rejected.  If  adopted,  it  will  have  a  greater  tendency 
to  cement  and  perpetuate  the  Union  than  anything  that  has 
occurred  since  the  adoption  of  the  Constitution  itself.  If  rejected, 
its  friends  will  undoubtedly  submit  to  the  constitutional  decision, 
and  wait  until  the  progress  of  reason  shall  produce  a  state  of  things 
more  favorable  to  the  purposes  of  justice.  Of  the  seventeen  States 
there  are  only  five  whose  representation  is  increased  by  the  slaves 
they  hold.  Twelve  States,  therefore,  have  a  permanent  and  de- 
cisive interest,  which  must  unite  them  eventually  in  wiping  away 
this  national  scandal.1  Of  the  five  whose  number  of  members 
would  be  reduced  by  the  amendment,  Georgia  would  lose  but  one 
member,  and  North  Carolina  only  two.  The  relative  weight  of 
these  two  States  would,  therefore,  rather  be  raised  than  depressed 
by  the  exchange,  and  their  interest  will  concur  with  that  of  the 
twelve.  Even  in  Virginia,  the  inhabitants  beyond  the  mountains, 
who  constitute  a  majority  of  the  freemen  in  that  Commonwealth, 
would  gain  rather  than  lose  in  their  proportion  of  the  representa- 
tion; so  that  when  once  the  voice  of  solid  and  undeniable  interest, 
concurring  with  those  of  honor  and  Republican  principle,  shall 

1  In  his  remarks  in  the  Senate  he  altered  the  numbers  to  seven  slave  and  ten 
non-slave-holding  States. 


74  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

cease  to  be  stifled  by  the  deafening  din  of  party  spirit,  there  can  be 
no  doubt  but  that  the  amendment  will  prevail.  This  consideration 
will  naturally  lead  the  friends  of  the  measure  to  pursue  it  at  once 
with  temper  and  perseverance.  Persuaded  that  the  Union  is  the 
first  of  political  blessings  to  every  part  of  these  States,  they  will 
never  be  inclined  to  hazard  it  for  any  subordinate  consideration; 
at  the  same  time,  assured  that  the  more  firmly  its  foundations  are 
fixed  on  the  foundations  of  freedom  and  equal  rights,  the  more  solid 
and  durable  will  be  the  fabric,  they  will  not  relax  their  mild  but 
determined  exertions  until  the  honorable  object  for  which  they 
contend  shall  be  attained. 

But  it  was  asserted  that  when  the  Constitution  was  debated  in 
the  State  convention  this  very  article  was  warmly  advocated  by 
the  most  distinguished  characters  in  that  body,  who  advocated  its 
adoption. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  the  Constitution  was  then  an  un- 
tried experiment;  every  one  of  the  important  States  in  the  Union 
was  divided  almost  equally  on  the  propriety  of  adopting  it  at  all. 
In  the  Massachusetts  convention  the  vote  of  adoption  was  carried 
only  by  a  majority  of  eighteen  in  three  hundred  and  seventy  mem- 
bers. Those  who  on  the  main  question  were  for  the  rejection  of  the 
instrument,  of  course,  raised  every  possible  objection  of  detail 
which  their  ingenuity  could  devise;  and  they  who  conceived  it  of 
the  utmost  importance  upon  the  whole  that  it  should  be  adopted 
were  often  called  upon  to  justify  or  palliate  sections  which  sepa- 
rately considered  might  have  been  highly  objectionable  to  them- 
selves. How  the  government  would  operate  in  practice  was  neces- 
sarily conjectural;  and  they  whose  hopes  were  chiefly  founded  upon 
the  result  of  the  whole  system,  naturally  became  sanguine  in  their 
expectation  of  advantages  from  particular  parts. 

The  ground  upon  which  this  paragraph  was  supported  by  the 
federalists  in  the  Massachusetts  convention  was  that  it  sanctioned 
the  principle  of  making  representation  and  taxation  go  hand  in 
hand.  The  objections  against  it  were  that  the  negroes  would  not 
be  taxed  enough  for  this  proportion,  and  it  was  compared  with  the 


i8o4J  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  75 

mode  established  in  the  old  confederation  of  raising  quotas  in  pro- 
portion to  the  lands  surveyed  and  improvements.  The  inequality 
of  representation  resulting  from  this  article  was  not  foreseen;  no 
objection  of  that  nature  was  raised.  It  has  risen  from  the  non- 
execution  of  that  part  of  it  which  favors  us  —  the  taxation,  while 
the  part  which  favors  our  Southern  States,  the  representation,  is 
carried  into  full  effect.  Both  parties  took  it  for  granted  that  as  we 
should  be  represented,  so  should  we  be  taxed.  The  practice  of  the 
Constitution  has  proved  otherwise.  In  the  course  of  fifteen  years 
the  direct  tax  has  been  resorted  to  only  once,  and  then  was  paid 
ineffectually,  or  not  at  all,  by  the  slave-holding  States.  The 
treasury  has  not  received  a  dollar  of  this  tax  from  South  Carolina 
or  Georgia,  and  several  others  of  those  States  are  great  defaulters 
in  that  payment. 

This  amendment  then,  thus  reasonable  in  itself,  thus  urged  by 
every  moral  and  political  consideration,  and  thus  required  by  the 
unequivocal  interest  of  a  proportion  of  those  States  abundantly 
sufficient  to  carry  it  through,  can  be  resisted  effectually  only  by 
the  operation  of  a  single  cause;  the  undue  influence  of  the  national 
executive.  The  President  of  the  United  States  belongs  to  that  part 
of  the  State  of  Virginia  which,  by  the  effect  of  the  iniquitous  mode 
of  representation  now  established,  sends  at  least  two  representa- 
tives to  Congress,  where  upon  principles  of  equal  rights,  they  ought 
to  send  but  one.  His  personal  and  local  interests  are,  of  course,  in 
opposition  to  the  proposed  amendment,  and  there  is  no  doubt  but 
all  his  influence  will  be  exerted  against  it.  If  we  judge  of  the  party 
which  now  governs  this  Union  by  their  acts,  it  will  appear  that  their 
whole  political  system  centres  in  personal  attachment  to  him  and 
his  views,  while  on  the  other  part  his  system  consists  in  substituting 
them  instead  of  the  nation.  The  destruction  of  the  judiciary  in- 
dependence; the  persevering  system  of  turning  out  honest  men 
from  office  to  introduce  partisans  in  their  place;  and  the  amend- 
ment to  the  Constitution,  carried  through  with  such  extreme 
precipitation,  and  at  such  heavy  expense  to  the  people  of  this 
country,  for  the  sole  purpose  of  securing  his  re-election,  are  all 


76  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

explained  by  this  solution,  and  can  be  explained  by  no  other.  It  is 
this  consideration  which  makes  it  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the 
people  of  Massachusetts  to  mark  the  conduct  of  that  faction  here. 
Let  us  not  deceive  ourselves  with  fallacious  hopes.  So  long  as  a 
formidable  party  among  ourselves  shall  oppose  our  restoration  to 
equal  rights,  we  shall  certainly  never  obtain  it.  They  who  derive 
the  benefit  from  exclusive  privileges  will  not  readily  relinquish 
them;  and  while  the  cause  of  freedom  is  paralyzed  by  defection  in 
its  own  ranks,  it  can  meet  with  nothing  but  defeat. 

An  anxious  concern  for  the  liberties  and  interests  of  my  fellow 
citizens  has  been  the  sole  inducement  to  these  remarks,  which  I 
shall  now  bring  to  a  conclusion.  On  three  important  occasions  in 
the  legislature  of  the  State,  we  have  seen  the  leaders  of  a  party 
running  counter  to  the  manifest  and  momentous  interest  of  the 
State.  It  was  conceived  an  injunction  of  public  duty  to  show: 
First,  that  the  arguments  and  pretended  facts  alleged  for  this 
strange  dereliction  of  principle  were  not  founded  in  truth;  and 
secondly,  that  those  party  leaders  were  under  the  influence  of 
certain  partial  and  personal  inducements,  different  from,  and  in 
opposition  to,  the  interests  of  their  constituents.  The  singularity 
of  their  conduct  necessarily  led  to  an  investigation  of  its  motives, 
and  the  discovery  of  the  motives  furnishes  a  clear  elucidation  of 
the  conduct.  It  is  with  the  most  cordial  satisfaction  I  have  ob- 
served, that  on  every  one  of  those  occasions,  many  individuals  of 
the  party  in  the  House  of  Representatives  refused  to  go  the  lengths 
to  which  the  leaders  would  have  impelled  them.  The  motion  of  a 
panegyric  on  Mr.  Jefferson  was  hence  withdrawn.  The  insult 
upon  the  majority  of  the  legislature  was  disavowed  by  many  of 
those  who  in  an  unguarded  hour  had  signed  it;  and  on  the  final 
question  upon  Mr.  Ely's  motion,  the  small  number  of  those  who 
dared  to  vote  against  it  was  a  proof  that  all  were  not  equally  pre- 
pared to  abandon  their  country,  to  please  their  patron.  I  am  sorry 
to  have  seen  no  such  signs  of  compunction  in  the  minority  of  the 
Senate.  To  those  who  thus  staggered  at  the  sacrifice  of  duty  re- 
quired of  them,  and  started  back  from  the  threshold  of  guilt  to 


i8o4]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  77 

which  they  had  been  drawn,  the  present  recess  of  the  legislature 
gives  a  favorable  opportunity  for  the  reflection.  Let  us  fervently 
hope  that  they  will  see  the  precipice  into  which  interested  and  art- 
ful men  have  been  struggling  to  push  them,  and  by  their  future 
conduct  will  prove  that  they  are  determined  to  pursue  the  path 
of  their  duty,  and  cling  to  the  true  interest  of  their  country. 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

WASHINGTON,  3  November,  1804. 


DEAR  SIR: 


Since  my  arrival  here  I  have  called  upon  the  President, 
who  had  some  conversation  with  me  respecting  the  conduct 
of  the  British  frigates  on  our  coast  during  the  course  of  the 
last  summer,  and  respecting  the  trade  of  arms  and  ammuni- 
tion principally  carried  on  from  New  York  to  St.  Domingo. 
He  said  nothing  relative  to  the  controversies  with  Spain  as 
to  the  murmurs  of  Louisiana.1 

As  to  the  British  frigates  there  is  no  official  information 
of  that  disapprobation  by  the  British  government  upon  the 
conduct  of  their  officers,  which  has  been  announced  in  the 
newspapers.  Nor  does  it  appear  that  the  captains  of  the 
Cambrian  and  Leander,  or  either  of  them,  have  been  re- 
called.2 But  they  have  not  given  any  recent  cause  of  com- 
plaint, and  by  the  letters  from  Mr.  Monroe  the  ministry  give 
him  perfect  satisfaction  upon  every  representation  made  by 
him  on  the  subject.  The  conduct  of  their  ships  and  officers 
in  the  European  seas  is  also  generally  such  as  is  satisfactory 

1  See  Jefferson's  Message  to  Congress,  November  8,  1804,  and  bill  sent  to  Ran- 
dolph, in  Writings  of  Jefferson  (Ford),  VIII.  323,  333.    Also  American  State  Papers, 
Foreign  Relations,  II.  606. 

2  Writings  of  James  Madison  (Hunt),  VII.  156. 


78  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

to  him.  The  disposition  of  the  present  Ministry  is  also  very 
amicable. 

The  trade  from  New  York  to  St.  Domingo  is  a  subject  of 
grievous  complaint  to  the  French  Minister,1  who  perempto- 
rily demands  that  our  government  should  interfere  to  sup- 
press it.  The  blacks  give  such  excessive  prices  for  arms  and 
ammunition,  that  general  merchants  in  New  York  have 
fitted  out,  and  are  still  fitting  out,  vessels  to  send  them  these 
articles;  in  some  instances  they  have  armed  the  ships  in  force 
sufficient  to  force  their  way  through  in  case  of  attack  by  the 
French  privateers.  Mr.  Jefferson  thinks  that  on  the  return 
of  any  of  these  armed  vessels,  if  they  should  have  fought 
with  a  French  privateer  and  killed  one  of  her  men,  our 
judges  ought  to  hang  every  man  on  board  the  American  ves- 
sel for  murder.  He  draws  his  inference  from  the  common 
law  principle,  that  homicide  committed  in  support  of  an  un- 
lawful act  is  murder.  But  common  law  rules  should  not 
be  applied  to  the  objects  which  essentially  belong  to  the 
laws  of  nations.  I  questioned  the  accuracy  of  his  argument, 
but  asked  him  why  the  government  had  not  interposed  to 
prevent  the  arming  of  these  vessels  at  New  York.  He  said 
the  law  would  not  bear  them  out  in  such  interference,  though 
he  admitted  it  had  been  done  at  an  early  period  of  the  late 
war.  This  he  first  said  was  by  virtue  of  a  temporary  law;  but 
afterwards  recollecting  himself  said  it  had  been  done  with- 
out a  law,  and  submitted  to.  But  that  had  it  been  contested, 
the  authority  of  the  government  would  not  have  been  sup- 
ported for  the  measure.  Hence  I  conclude  we  shall  have  a 
law  for  such  an  authority  at  the  approaching  session. 

I  have  seen  General  Wilkinson,  who  has  taken  a  house  here 
to  reside  during  the  session.  I  imagine  he  waits  for  an  an- 
swer from  you  to  his  letter.  His  power  to  prescribe  round 

1  Louis-Marie  Turreau  de  Linieres  (1756-1816). 


i8o42  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  79 

heads  to  his  officers  is  denied  at  the  War  office,  and,  therefore, 
the  court-martial  on  Major  Butler  hangs  heavily  upon  him. 
Colonel  Burrows  is  also  here,  and  I  hear  has  fully  and  honor- 
ably settled  his  accounts.    But  his  health  is  very  low. 
I  am,  etc. 

TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

[November,  1804.] 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

I  have  been  happy  to  receive  your  obliging  favor  of  the 
I4th  instant,  and  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  opinions 
respecting  the  points  of  maritime  law,  which  require  our 
attention  at  this  time.  A  coincidence  of  your  opinion  with 
that  of  the  President  of  the  United  States  would  be  more 
than  enough  to  stagger  me  in  any  point  upon  which  I  should 
have  formed  a  different  one.  It  makes  me,  therefore,  pecu- 
liarly mistrust  that  which  I  entertain  on  this  subject.  The 
President's  position  was  that  our  judges  ought  to  hang  Amer- 
ican citizens  who  should  have  committed  homicide  in  re- 
sisting the  execution  of  French  revenue  laws  in  the  West 
Indies.  And  he  gave  to  support  his  reasoning  the  common 
law  principle,  that  homicide  committed  in  support  of  an 
unlawful  act  is  murder.  In  this  opinion  you  say  he  was 
right.  I  can  only  reply  what  I  replied  to  him:  That  I  had  al- 
ways considered  it  as  a  settled  maxim  that  no  nation  takes 
notice  of  the  revenue  or  colonial  laws  of  another  nation;  and 
therefore  that  our  judges  could  not  hang  Americans  in  the 
case  he  put,  for  homicide  in  support  of  acts  which  to  our 
judges  were  not  unlawful.  I  have,  however,  even  believed 
that  in  these  cases  of  contraband,  unless  the  French  judges 
should  violate  the  universal  usage  of  nations,  they  themselves 
could  not  hang  our  people  for  homicide  in  such  a  case  — 
either  as  murder  or  as  piracy.  It  is  an  act  sui  generis  — 


8o  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

forcing  a  contraband  trade  by  foreign  subjects.  And  persons 
taken  even  after  fighting  and  killing  to  force  their  way  in 
such  cases  are  punishable  neither  for  murder  nor  piracy,  but 
for  supporting  contraband  by  violence.  I  know  very  well 
that  such  transactions  have  sometimes  produced  wars  be- 
tween nations;  but  I  never  yet  heard  of  an  instance  in  which 
the  common  law  maxim,  that  homicide  in  support  of  tres- 
pass was  murder,  has  ever  been  adopted  into  the  laws  of  na- 
tions as  relating  to  forcible  contraband  trade  by  foreign  sub- 
jects. There  appears  to  me  to  be  very  cogent  reasons  why 
the  principle  ought  not  to  apply;  and  as  far  as  my  recollec- 
tion serves  it  is  in  practice  never  made  to  apply.  It  may 
perhaps  resemble  that  stipulation  in  almost  all  the  commer- 
cial treaties,  that  if  a  subject  of  either  party  shall  take  a 
commission  against  the  other  from  a  third  power,  and  be 
taken,  he  shall  be  punished  as  a  pirate.  Now  pirates,  as  you 
justly  observe,  are  punished  with  death;  and  yet  I  have  al- 
ways understood  that  by  the  universal  usage  of  nations, 
that  offence  by  positive  stipulation  made  punishable  like 
piracy,  is  not  punishable  with  death.  I  have  consulted  the 
British  statutes  which  you  mention  respecting  the  trial  and 
punishment  of  piracy,  but  they  do  not  seem  to  me  at  all  to 
settle  the  question.  For  in  all  instances  where  they  ^peak 
specifically,  they  mention  hostilities  by  British  subjects 
against  other  British  subjects;  seeming  in  some  sort  thereby 
to  make  the  distinction  between  them  and  foreigners  for 
which  I  contend.  Besides  none  of  these  statutes  seem  to 
contemplate  cases  of  forcible  contraband;  nor  do  I  find  any- 
thing in  the  books  holding  this  up  as  piracy.  I  shall  be  very 
glad  to  read  over  again  Judge  Marshall's  speech  in  the 
House  of  Representatives  on  the  case  of  the  pirate  and 
murderer  Nash.1  I  recollect  it  perfectly  well,  having  read  it 

J  Annals  of  Congress,  6th  Cong.,  596. 


i8o4]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  81 

with  much  pleasure  as  published  at  the  time  when  it  was 
delivered.  But  this  case  stands  again  on  different  grounds. 
I  have  no  doubt  as  to  the  nature  of  Nash's  offence. 

It  is  indeed  very  apparent  that  popularity  bears  a  strong 
resemblance  to  the  itch  by  its  contagion,  and  the  President, 
who  has  himself  enough  of  the  itch  of  popularity,  may  con- 
gratulate himself  upon  its  wide  spread  in  Massachusetts.  I 
consider  the  revolution  there  as  completed,  and  that  in  the 
spring  both  our  executive  and  legislature  will  pass  into  other 
hands  and  other  principles.  What  the  new  principles  will 
be,  may  be  inferred  from  the  character  of  the  future  chief 
magistrate,  and  the  experience  we  have  had  of  the  conse- 
quences attending  similar  changes  in  the  other  states.  Their 
tendency  will  be  to  corrupt  public  opinions  and  to  introduce 
much  injustice  and  oppression.  But  the  national  prosperity 
appears  to  be  very  little  affected  by  all  these  party  over- 
throws. It  is  in  the  season  of  the  harvest  that  the  pernicious 
effects  of  the  weeds  sowed  in  spring  are  felt. 

We  have  hitherto  done  here  nothing  or  next  to  nothing. 
But  such  idleness  is  better  than  the  activity  which  will  prob- 
ably succeed.  There  are  three  deputies  from  New  Orleans 
arrived,1  but  they  have  not  yet  presented  their  remonstrance. 
I  have  read  a  French  pamphlet  published  in  that  country, 
containing  a  detail  of  their  grievances,  and  our  sovereigns 
here  begin  to  think  that  forcing  laws  upon  a  people,  in  a 
language  of  which  they  are  ignorant,  and  sending  them 
officers  who  can  neither  understand  them  nor  be  understood 
by  them,  is  a  little  incongruous  for  the  most  enlightened 
people  upon  earth.  My  expectation  is  that  the  system  to  be 
adopted  will  pass  from  one  extreme  to  the  other,  and  that 
the  next  step  will  be  to  admit  them  by  act  of  Congress  into 
the  Union  as  a  State,  and  empower  them  to  make  their  own 

1  Pierre  Sauve,  Pierre  Derbigny  and  Jean  Noel  Destrehan. 


82  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

Constitution.  There  is  a  probability  favorable  to  any  plans 
other  than  that  which  appears  the  right  one,  to  your  faithful 
and  affectionate. 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

WASHINGTON,  n  December,  1804. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

I  received  together  last  evening  your  two  favors  of  3Oth 
ultimo  and  2nd  instant,  for  which  I  most  sincerely  return 
you  my  thanks.  In  the  dreary  path  which  I  am  now  com- 
pelled to  tread,  it  is  cheering  to  the  spirits  and  gives  the  most 
pleasing  consolation  to  have  occasionally  the  benefit  of  your 
correspondence.  What  the  issue  of  the  election  in  Massa- 
chusetts will  be  on  the  harmony  of  the  ruling  party,  I  do  not 
venture  to  conjecture;  but  that  it  has  already  sunk  the  in- 
fluence of  New  England,  low  as  it  was  before,  I  have  suffi- 
cient evidence  to  be  satisfactory  to  my  own  mind.  The 
choice  of  Parson  Bentley l  as  chaplain  to  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives at  the  commencement  of  this  session  will  show 
you  what  is  held  out  to  the  New  England  members  as  proofs 
of  their  weight  in  the  councils  of  the  Union,  and  what  they 
are  willing  to  accept  as  such.  I  think  this  favor  must  content 
them  for  the  present  session.  The  claimants  of  the  Georgia 
lands  must  go  home  again  reinfecta,  for  there  appears  to  me 
from  all  the  symptoms  yet  discovered  much  less  chance  for 
them  this  session,  than  there  was  last  winter.  But  I  presume 
Mr.  Morton  2  gets  well  compensated  by  his  fellow-claimants 
for  his  yearly  visits  to  the  seat  of  government,  and  if  he  is 
not  successful  in  the  pursuit  of  their  interests,  he  may  perhaps 

1  William  Bentley,  of  Salem.    See  Diary  of  William  Bentley,  III.  125. 

2  Perez  Morton,  one  of  the  agents  for  claimants  of  lands  lying  south  of  Tennessee 
and  west  of  Georgia. 


i8o4]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  83 

eventually  obtain  some  consolation  and  indemnity  for  the 
injury  to  his  own.  He  has  not  yet  been  appointed  to  the 
office  that  I  have  heard  of,  but  this  morning  the  Senate 
have  consented  to  and  advised  the  appointment  of  Benjamin 
Austin,  junior,  to  the  office  of  Commissioner  of  Loans  for 
the  State  of  Massachusetts.  This  subject  of  appointments 
in  Senate  has  undergone  a  great  revolution  since  you  pre- 
sided here.  In  all  possible  cases  provisional  appointments 
are  made  during  the  recess,  so  that  when  the  Senate  meet,  the 
candidates  proposed  to  their  consideration  are  already  in 
possession  of  the  offices  to  which  they  are  to  be  appointed. 
The  forms  of  deliberation  are  however  tenaciously  adhered 
to,  and  with  some  degree  of  affectation.  Nomination  lists 
are  postponed  from  time  to  time,  without  any  other  reason 
for  postponement,  and  when  acted  upon  the  candidates  reg- 
ularly receive  from  the  Senators  of  their  state  a  panegyric 
usually  very  highly  charged.  To  this  course  of  proceeding 
I  have  never  known  any  exception,  but  in  two  or  three  in- 
stances from  federal  members,  on  the  ground  of  objections 
against  the  moral  characters  of  the  candidates.  And  the 
only  effect  of  such  objections  has  been  to  take  the  vote  by 
yeas  and  nays,  when  in  every  such  instance  all  the  members 
excepting  the  federalists  have  voted  for  the  persons  excepted 
against.  I  have  uniformly  borne  testimony  in  favor  of  the 
candidates  of  Massachusetts,  when  I  knew  them,  and  could 
honestly  do  it  independent  of  all  considerations  of  politics. 
And  especially  in  the  instances  of  Henry  Warren  and  of 
Mr.  Bowdoin.1  In  all  other  cases  I  have  been  silent  when 
I  could;  for  experience  had  shown  me  that  to  object  infamy 
of  character  against  a  man  would  be  a  sure  means  of  securing 
about  three  votes  in  four  upon  record  in  his  favor.  This 
silence  has  been  from  the  same  motive  become  so  habitual 

1  James  Bowdoin  (1752-1811),  minister  to  Spain. 


84  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

with  all  the  minority,  that  the  ruling  party  seem  to  be  a 
little  uneasy  under  it.  This  morning  on  going  into  the 
nomination  list,  the  first  appearance  was  that  it  would  go 
through  without  any  comment,  excepting  the  little  prettiness 
of  postponing  some  half  dozen  names  for  further  informa- 
tion —  to  be  eulogized  the  next  time  they  are  taken  up.  But 
after  getting  on  some  way  Mr.  Franklin,1  a  very  scrupulous 
gentleman,  rose  and  said  these  were  very  important  appoint- 
ments, and  he  did  not  like  to  act  upon  them  without  some 
testimony  from  members  who  could  bear  it,  and  particularly 
from  the  members  of  the  states  to  which  the  candidates  be- 
longed. Bye  and  bye  came  the  name  of  Benjamin  Austin, 
junior.  Profound  silence  for  some  minutes.  At  last  I  rose 
and  said  that  "I  knew  Mr.  Austin,  but  could  say  nothing 
of  him."  Upon  which  Mr.  Ellery,2  of  Rhode  Island,  rose 
and  said,  Mr.  Austin  was  a  man  of  very  great  abilities  and  a 
most  respectable  character.  He  sat  down  and  Benjamin 
Austin,  junior,  was  appointed  nemine  contradicente,  just  as 
he  would  have  [been],  if  Mr.  Franklin  had  been  less  anxious 
for  testimony  from  the  Senators  of  the  states  where  the 
candidates  belonged. 

In  making  and  reiterating  the  request  that  you  would 
commit  to  writing  memoirs  of  your  own  life,  I  did  not  ex- 
pect that  it  would  consist  of  recollections  altogether  pleasing. 
I  am  well  aware  that  the  pictures  both  of  men  and  events, 
which  your  unalterable  regard  to  truth  would  often  render 
necessary,  must  be  marked  with  very  dark  shades.  But  such 
must  be  the  fate  of  every  man  who  distinguishes  himself  in 
any  eminent  manner  among  his  fellow  men;  and  I  was  and 
remain  decided  in  the  opinion,  that  a  work  of  this  kind  from 
you  would  be  extremely  useful  both  to  your  family  and  your 

1  Jesse  Franklin  (1760-1823)  of  Virginia. 

2  Christopher  Ellery  (1768-1840). 


i8o4]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  85 

country.  I  am  persuaded  from  the  vigor  and  accuracy  of 
your  judgment,  neither  vanity  nor  disappointment  would 
suffer  you  to  misrepresent  or  mistake  any  material  part  of 
the  narrative,  and  that  you  would  always  have  a  due  control 
over  all  the  natural  instigations  of  self-complacency  and  im- 
portance, which  must  continually  occur  to  a  man  writing  of 
himself.  As  to  the  exhibition  in  their  nakedness  of  other 
eminent  men,  it  is  one  of  the  principal  reasons  for  which  I 
wished  you  to  write;  I  am  sure  you  will  treat  them  all  with 
perfect  candor;  that  you  will  do  them  honorable  and  impar- 
tial justice.  But  I  am  also  sure  that  you  will  make  them 
known  to  us  in  their  real  colors,  stripped  of  all  their  disguises 
in  which  their  own  arts  or  the  hopes  or  fears  of  others  have 
arrayed  them.  I  intreat  you  to  reconsider  this  subject,  and 
hope  you  will  comply  with  my  request.  The  plan  of  the 
work  may  be  suited  to  your  own  convenience,  and  com- 
pressed into  a  small  or  dilated  to  a  voluminous  extent  as  you 
please. 

The  bill  for  the  preservation  of  peace  in  the  ports  and 
harbors  has  met  with  much  investigation  in  the  House  of 
Representatives,  and  has  not  yet  come  to  us  —  twice  re- 
committed to  the  reporting  committee,  and  yet  laboring. 
There  is  also  another  bill  for  establishing  an  Admiralty 
Court  in  the  Mediterranean  which  it  appears  to  me  calls 
for  much  consideration.  This,  and  the  other  bills  in  embryo, 
which  I  have  regularly  forwarded  for  my  brother,  will  show 
that  the  other  House  have  got  seriously  engaged  in  business, 
which  is  yet  very  languishing  with  us. 

Another  appointment  this  morning  —  William  Lyman  of 
Massachusetts,  Consul  at  LONDON.  He  was  appointed  about 
a  fortnight  ago  Surveyor  and  Inspector  at  New  Orleans;  but 
it  seems  the  climate  of  England  suits  him  better  than  that 
of  Louisiana.  General  Smith  this  morning  declared  that 


86  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

unless  some  member  of  the  Senate  would  testify  to  Mr. 
Lyman's  competency  for  this  office,  he  should  vote  against 
him,  for  it  was  an  important  office  and  ought  to  be  well 
filled.  Upon  which  Mr.  Lyman's  panegyric  was  pronounced 
by  Messrs.  Giles,  Mitchill  and  Bradley,  perfectly  to  General 
Smith's  satisfaction.  Smith  had  served  several  years  in  the 
House  with  Lyman,  and  it  seems  in  all  that  time  did  not  dis- 
cover his  merits.  Mr.  Giles  had  been  more  penetrating;  for 
he  alleged  that  very  circumstance  as  the  only  basis  of  his 
knowledge;  and  now  though  Smith  was  so  far  from  being 
satisfied  with  his  own  observations  at  that  time,  that  he  was 
determined  to  vote  against  this  able  man,  unless  somebody 
would  give  him  a  certificate  of  character,  he  readily  takes 
upon  trust  Mr.  Giles'  certificate  founded  on  the  same  prin- 
ciples from  which  Smith  himself  had  drawn  so  different  a 
conclusion.  So  you  see  nobody  can  be  appointed  without  a 
puff,  just  fit  for  a  newspaper  obituary. 

The  French  Minister,  General  Turreau,  has  called  upon 
me.  His  family  has  not  yet  arrived.  The  President  com- 
plains that  he  glitters  too  much  with  gold  lace,  and  hopes  in 
time  to  get  him  down  to  a  plain  frock  coat.  The  Legion  of 
Honor  has  a  bauble  at  the  buttonhole  so  closely  resembling 
the  old  Croix  de  St.  LOUISA  that  it  requires  an  opera  glass  to 
discover  the  difference  between  them.  The  President  told 
me  that  the  best  thing  which  could  now  happen  to  the 
French  nation  would  be  to  recall  the  old  family  III  and  take 
up  the  Constitution  of  1791.  For  that  although  that  con- 
stitution made  the  government  too  weak  II  and  was  defective 
in  having  a  legislature  in  one  branch!  yet  even  that  would 
be  better  than  the  present  unlimited  domination.  I  hope 
he  does  not  talk  so  to  any  body  who  will  carry  his  words  to 
the  Emperor  Napoleon. 

Ever  affectionately  yours. 


i8o4]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  87 

PROPOSED  AMENDMENT  TO  THE  CONSTITUTION  ON 

REPRESENTATION l 

[December,  1804.] 

The  proposition  submitted  by  my  colleague  to  the  consideration 
of  the  Senate,  conformably  to  the  instructions  of  our  immediate 
constituents,  the  Legislature  of  Massachusetts,  is,  I  am  sensible, 
of  such  a  nature  that  it  cannot  be  expected  to  be  received  by  this 
body  with  unanimous  approbation.  It  would  doubtless  be  a  more 
agreeable  task,  both  to  him  and  to  me,  were  it  in  the  compass  of  our 
power  to  introduce  and  advocate  any  measure  of  important  benefit 
to  all  the  people  of  the  United  States,  and  in  support  of  which  we 
might  reasonably  calculate  upon  every  vote  in  this  and  the  other 
House  of  Congress.  But  if  this  unanimity  would  be  an  idle  ex- 
pectation upon  almost  any  question  which  can  be  brought  before 
us;  if  it  were  a  more  than  idle  expectation  upon  almost  any  question 
of  the  magnitude  and  importance  of  this;  preeminently  vain  and 
absurd  would  be  the  hope  of  such  unanimity,  on  a  question  against 
which  we  have  to  contend  with  the  local  interests,  and  exclusive 
privileges  of  a  powerful  and  respectable  portion  of  the  Union. 

But  it  is  in  the  unalterable  nature  of  things  that  every  public 
measure  of  great  importance  should,  in  some  degree,  differently 
affect  the  partial  interests  and  feelings  of  the  different  parts  of  the 
nation.  Our  association  consists  of  constituent  parts,  whose  super- 
ficial  interests  are  not  only  variant  but  often  opposite  to  each 
other.  The  seamen  of  your  seaports  would  naturally  say  the  monies 
raised  upon  the  hard  earnings  of  our  industry  ought  to  be  exclu- 
sively appropriated  to  our  benefit.  But  perhaps  in  another  quarter 
might  be  found  very  respectable  citizens  who  would  think  a  sea- 
man's fund  collected  at  Baltimore  or  Philadelphia  a  very  proper 

1  From  a  MS.  in  the  Adams  Mss.  The  amendment  was  that  described  as  Ely's 
motion  in  the  newspaper  article,  page  69,  supra.  These  remarks  were  to  be  de- 
livered in  the  Senate,  but  it  is  doubtful  if  an  opportunity  offered,  as  they  are  not 
mentioned  in  the  Annals  of  Congress  for  this  session.  See  Adams,  Memoirs, 
December  3,  4,  7,  1804;  Ames,  Proposed  Amendments  to  the  Constitution,  45. 


THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

object  of  application  for  the  support  of  the  common  town  paupers 
elsewhere.  Is  the  revenue  from  the  post  office  to  be  appropriated 
to  the  improvement  of  the  roads?  The  merchant  who  pays  the 
postage  would  deem  it  reasonable  that  it  should  go  to  ameliorate 
the  roads  and  accelerate  the  communication  of  that  correspondence 
which  furnishes  the  money.  But  a  holder  of  wild-lands,  wishing 
a  road  through  the  desert  made  at  any  cost  but  his  own,  will  come 
and  with  the  acuteness  of  a  metaphysician  will  show,  that  postage 
is  not  a  tax  but  a  compensation  for  a  service  rendered;  that  gov- 
ernment has  a  right  to  insist  upon  rendering  this  service  and  upon 
being  paid  its  own  price  for  it;  and  if  it  can  thus  raise  money  from 
one  citizen,  it  has  a  right  equally  clear  and  indisputable  to  bestow 
it  upon  another.  The  merchant  perhaps  may  not  feel  the  force 
of  this  reasoning,  but  what  can  he  do?  What  can  he  do?  What  he 
does.  Pay  his  postage,  and  hear  of  roads  opened  through  the 
wilderness. 

But  we  have  all  a  deep  a  permanent  and  a  paramount  interest  in 
Union.  It  is  to  reconcile  these  conflicting  interests,  to  harmonize 
these  jarring  elements  that  our  common  Constitution  was  estab- 
lished, and  for  this  our  government  should  be  administered.  The 
Constitution  itself  was,  as  all  acknowledge,  the  result  of  com- 
promise and  mutual  concession.  The  alterations  in  it  which  may 
be  rendered  necessary  from  time  to  time,  and  the  administration 
of  the  laws  under  it,  ought  then  to  be  distinguished  by  the  same 
spirit.  If,  therefore,  any  part  of  the  Constitution  is  found  by  ex- 
perience to  bear  with  peculiar  hardship  upon  one  part  of  the 
nation;  or  to  be  impracticable  in  its  execution,  or  unjust  and  im- 
moral in  its  necessary  consequences;  or  by  the  lapse  of  time  and  by 
events  that  have  happened  subsequent  to  its  formation  rendered 
improper  and  oppressive,  they  who  suffer  under  its  operation  are 
fully  authorized  by  the  Constitution  itself  to  ask  for  an  alteration, 
and  may  reasonably  hope  from  the  justice  of  their  sister  states 
that  their  complaints  will  be  heard  and  their  wrongs  redressed, 
though  some  other  partial  local  or  momentary  interest  should 
stand  arrayed  against  their  claims. 


i8o4]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  89 

It  is  on  these  solid  grounds  that  the  legislature  of  Massachusetts 
solicit  a  revisal  and  amendment  of  that  part  of  the  Constitution 
which  prescribes  the  proportion  of  representation  in  the  other 
house  of  Congress,  allowed  to  the  respective  states.  It  is  the  belief 
of  that  legislature  that  the  ratio  of  representation  as  at  present 
established  is: 

1.  Burdensome  in  its  operation  on  far  the  greatest  part  of  the 
Union; 

2.  Unjust,  immoral  and  impolitic  in  its  necessary  consequences; 

3.  That  events  subsequent  to  the   adoption  of  the  Constitu- 
tion have  made  and  are  daily  making  it  more  and  more  objec- 
tionable; 

4.  And  that  it  has  been  found  by  experience  impracticable  in  its 
execution. 

I.  In  examining  the  principle  upon  which  this  ratio  of  representa- 
tion is  founded,  we  shall  find  it  contains  within  itself  an  essential 
source  of  discord  and  not  of  harmony;  it  professedly  makes  num- 
bers  the  measure  of  representation.  But  numbers  of  what?  Of  free 
inhabitants?  This  would  undoubtedly  be  upon  the  principles  of 
pure  republicanism,  the  only  answer  to  the  question,  and  would  to 
God  this  were  the  answer  we  could  make.  No,  sir.  The  answer 
must  be  double  —  for  one  portion  of  the  Union,  numbers  of  free 
inhabitants;  and  for  another  portion  of  the  Union,  numbers  of 
slaves,  cut  up  into  fractions  and  mingled  with  the  numbers  of  their 
masters.  Here  then  to  form  the  immediate  representatives  of  the 
people,  the  people  themselves  are  divided  into  two  classes,  and 
those  who  hold  slaves  are  invested  with  exclusive  privileges,  denied 
to  those  who  are  only  independent  freemen.  Such  is  the  real 
meaning  of  the  paragraph  of  which  we  propose  the  repeal,  though 
expressed  in  circumlocutions,  as  if  the  Constitution  was  ashamed 
or  afraid  to  speak  in  plain  terms  its  own  meaning.  At  the  present 
moment  the  delegation  from  ten  of  those  states  in  the  House  of 
Representatives  is  composed  of  members  chosen  by  the  numbers 
of  free  inhabitants.  The  representations  to  which  the  numbers  of 
slaves  contribute  are  sent  from  only  seven  states.  Those  seven 


90  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

states  then  possess  the  advantage  of  a  double  representation,  to  the 
manifest  detriment  and  injury  of  the  other  ten. 

Such  a  mode  of  representation  is  therefore  unjust,  inasmuch  as 
it  is  unequal.  It  is  unjust,  because  it  establishes  inequality  of 
rights,  and  of  the  rights  the  most  precious  in  the  sight  of  freemen 
between  fellow  citizens  of  the  same  community.  It  is  also  an  in- 
equality in  the  highest  degree  immoral  and  impolitic.  Its  immoral- 
ity is  derived  from  its  conferring  the  first  of  political  privileges  upon 
the  basis  of  the  greatest  outrage  on  the  rights  of  mankind.  The 
immorality  of  slavery  itself  has  been  so  clearly  proved  by  the  in- 
vestigation of  numerous  writers  in  modern  ages,  that  even  those 
who  exercise  that  dominion  over  their  fellow  men  have  themselves 
generally  admitted  that  it  is  an  offence  against  the  laws  of  nature 
and  of  God.  And  yet  our  present  mode  of  representation,  by  mak- 
ing the  numbers  of  slaves  a  component  part  of  the  right  to  vote, 
holds  out  a  strong  and,  as  we  plainly  see,  an  irresistible  temptation 
to  those  states  which  allow  slavery,  to  increase  and  multiply  as 
much  as  possible  the  number  of  these  unhappy  beings.  To  set  this 
argument  in  a  clearer  light,  let  us  only  for  a  moment  consider  the 
inconsistency  between  this  part  of  your  Constitution  and  the  laws 
of  the  country.  The  Constitution,  as  has  already  been  remarked, 
holds  out  a  reward  to  the  slave-holding  states  for  every  additional 
slave  they  import.  It  promises  them  for  every  five  thousand 
negroes  introduced  from  Africa,  three  thousand  and  more  votes 
added  to  them  for  electing  a  member  of  Congress,  and  a  President 
and  Vice  President  of  the  United  States.  It  is  giving  them  a 
bounty,  a  high  and  most  alluring  bounty,  upon  the  importation  of 
slaves,  and  so  careful  is  the  Constitution  to  secure  the  right  of 
claiming  this  bounty,  that  it  has  expressly  denied  to  Congress  the 
power  of  prohibiting  such  importations  prior  to  the  year  1808. 
Such  is  the  language  of  the  Constitution.  But  what  is  the  language 
of  the  laws? 

By  an  act  of  Congress  passed  on  the  22nd  of  March,  1794,  every 
citizen  of  the  United  States,  or  person  residing  within  the  same,  is 
prohibited  from  fitting  out,  building,  owning,  equipping,  loading 


i8o4]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  91 

or  otherwise  preparing  any  ship  or  vessel  within  the  United  States, 
for  the  purpose  of  carrying  on  any  trade  or  traffic  in  slaves  to  any 
foreign  country,  on  penalty  of  the  forfeiture  of  the  ship  and  a  for- 
feiture of  two  thousand  dollars.  And  if  any  citizen  of  the  United 
States  receives  slaves  on  board  a  vessel  for  the  purpose  of  such 
traffic,  he  forfeits  $200  for  every  person  so  received. 

By  another  act  passed  10  May,  1800,  every  citizen  of  the  United 
States  is  forbidden,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  hold  any  rights  or 
property  in  any  vessel  employed  in  such  traffic,  on  penalty  of  the 
forfeiture  of  all  such  property,  and  of  double  the  value  of  it  besides, 
and  double  the  value  of  his  interest  in  the  slaves.  Every  citizen 
for  merely  serving  on  board  a  vessel  employed  in  such  traffic  is 
made  liable  to  $2,000  fine  and  two  years'  imprisonment. 

Now,  sir,  upon  what  principle  is  it,  that  all  this  burden  of  pen- 
alties, forfeitures,  fines  and  imprisonment,  is  inflicted  upon  our 
citizens,  for  merely  having  an  interest  in  this  trade,  or  contributing 
to  it  by  personal  service?  Abstracted  from  its  inherent  and  indel- 
ible immorality  which,  God  forbid,  I  should  ever  attempt  to 
justify;  but  abstracted  from  that,  it  is  a  traffic  of  the  most  lucrative 
nature,  a  traffic  which  might  advantageously  employ  the  industry 
and  enterprise  of  great  numbers  of  our  citizens,  a  branch  of  trade 
in  which  the  balance  would  be  all  of  clear  profit  to  our  country,  a 
traffic  which  at  all  events  will  be  carried  on  by  other  trading  na- 
tions, and  on  which  all  our  pains  and  penalties  can  have  no  other 
effect  than  to  secure  to  those  other  nations  all  the  advantages  from 
which  we  exclude  our  own  citizens?  Upon  what  principle,  I  say, 
can  all  this  tempest  of  indignation  against  a  most  profitable  com- 
merce be  founded,  in  a  nation  so  essentially  commercial  as  ours, 
but  upon  the  consideration  that  the  trade  itself  is,  and  ever  must 
be,  a  heinous  crime  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  therefore  ought  to  be 
so  in  the  sight  of  man?  Let  us  suppose,  sir,  that  an  impartial  and 
philosophical  foreigner,  with  the  example  and  the  profound  pene- 
tration of  a  Montesquieu,  should  take  up  our  statute  book  with  a 
view  to  discover  in  it  the  spirit  of  our  laws.  Suppose  him  first  to 
examine  the  Constitution,  and  see  with  what  jealous  and  inflexible 


92  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

care  the  right  of  trafficking  in  slaves  is  reserved  to  one  part  of  the 
Union,  and  guarded  even  against  the  general  authority  of  the  na- 
tion. Then  imagine  him  to  remark  the  high  reward  offered  for  the 
increase  of  this  trade,  to  observe  that  the  slave  traders  had  stipu- 
lated for  an  increase  of  their  dearest  political  privileges  in  exact 
proportion  to  the  energy  and  vigor  with  which  they  should  drive 
this  trade.  I  ask  not  what  his  own  moral  feelings  would  inspire  into 
his  mind,  but  as  to  the  character  of  the  people  who  inserted  such 
articles  into  their  social  compact,  would  he  not  draw  from  it  as  an 
irresistible  inference  that  the  slave  trade  was  an  object  of  darling 
affection  to  that  people?  Then  let  him  cast  his  eyes  over  the  two 
statutes,  the  substance  of  which  I  have  just  now  stated.  Let  him 
reflect  upon  the  enterprising  commercial  genius  of  the  nation, 
upon  the  peculiar  allurements  of  the  commerce  itself,  and  how  will 
he  account  for  the  pointed  detestation  and  abhorrence  with  which 
it  is  prescribed?  Could  such  a  man  enter  this  hall,  would  he  not 
call  upon  us  for  an  explanation  of  this  strange  inconsistency  be- 
tween our  Constitution  and  our  laws;  between  the  charter  under 
which  we  act,  and  our  acts  under  the  charter?  Should  we  attempt 
to  justify  the  provision  of  the  Constitution,  would  not  his  finger 
pointed  to  the  laws  reduce  us  to  silence?  Should  we  presume  to 
account  for  the  laws  from  the  criminality  of  that  which  they  forbid, 
would  he  not  by  a  glance  at  the  Constitution  put  us  all  to  the 
blush?  Would  he  not  say,  if  the  slave  trade  is  criminal,  why  have 
you  placed  it  under  such  extraordinary  protection?  If  innocent, 
why  have  you  put  it  under  such  a  bitter  anathema?  The  spirit  of 
the  laws  should  be  consistent  in  right  or  in  wrong.  But  you  have 
taken  the  greatest  pains  to  pronounce  your  own  condemnation, 
and  have  made  your  own  laws  the  severest  stigma  upon  your  own 
Constitution.  But  if  a  speculative  observer  must  be  struck  with 
wonder  at  this  glaring  inconsistency  in  our  national  code,  would  he 
not  be  as  much  surprised  at  the  inequality  of  condition  under 
which  these  contradictory  regulations  place  the  different  sections 
of  the  Union  ?  He  would  perceive  that  the  slave  trade,  with  all  its 
evils  and  all  its  guilt,  is  possessed  of  the  two  advantages  which 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  93 

peculiarly  recommend  it  to  certain  passions  of  the  human  heart. 
To  the  southern  planter  it  furnishes  hands  for  the  cultivation  of  his 
soil.  And  to  the  eastern  merchant  and  seaman  it  furnishes  em- 
ployment for  shipping  and  commercial  capital.  To  both  it  is  a 
source  of  wealth  but  under  different  circumstances.  The  planter 
derives  no  benefit  from  the  trade  until  the  slaves  are  landed  upon 
our  shores.  The  merchant's  profits  are  limited  to  their  purchase 
in  Africa  and  their  transportation  over  the  seas.  The  benefit  to 
one  interest  ceases  where  the  other  begins.  In  restraining  the  trade 
of  slaves  to  foreign  countries  the  slave  owners  in  this  country 
make  no  sacrifice;  on  the  contrary  their  pecuniary  interest  may  be 
promoted  by  its  interdiction.  For  if  it  were  fostered  by  a  premium, 
they  are  not  a  seafaring  people  and  could  not  share  in  the  profits. 
And  by  obstructing  the  sale  of  slaves  to  other  countries  they  may 
perhaps  obtain  a  more  abundant  and  cheaper  supply  for  them- 
selves. This  is  the  only  point  of  view  in  which  the  seeming  incon- 
sistencies between  the  laws  and  the  Constitution  can  be  removed. 
Both  tend  to  favor  the  interests  of  the  slave  owners  among  our- 
selves. Both  tend  to  depress  the  interests  of  the  rest.  The  lan- 
guage of  the  Constitution  and  laws  where  combined  appears  to  be 
no  other  than  this.  We,  the  slave  owners,  will  suffer  nothing  to 
impede  our  purchase  of  slaves  to  the  full  extent  of  our  purses  and 
our  credit.  And  in  order  to  have  the  market  exclusively  to  our- 
selves we  will  seize,  confiscate,  fine  and  imprison  without  mercy, 
for  every  attempt  to  carry  or  sell  slaves  elsewhere.  But  surely, 
sir,  if  this  be  the  spirit  of  our  laws,  it  must  be  confessed  a  spirit  of 
injustice  and  inequality  in  the  extreme. 

Nor  is  the  impolicy  of  this  pointed  and  invidious  encouragement 
to  the  multiplication  of  slaves  within  the  United  States  less  ap- 
parent than  its  injustice.  For  the  possession  of  those  we  have  al- 
ready, perhaps  in  the  eyes  of  justice  and  humanity  we  might  offer 
some  palliation.  I  remember  that  at  the  last  session  of  Congress  a 
very  respectable  member  of  the  house  told  us,  that  for  a  long  time 
before  our  Revolution  the  legislature  of  Virginia  had  made  unavail- 
ing efforts  to  prohibit  the  importation  of  slaves  into  that  colony, 


94  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

but  that  [by]  the  influence  of  the  dealers  in  the  trade,  the  Liverpool 
merchants,  the  royal  sanction,  had  always  been  denied  to  every 
such  law.  As  far  then  as  the  evil  had  been  imposed  upon  us,  we 
may  derive  excuse  if  not  justification  from  that  necessity.  But 
surely  we  have  enough  and  too  many  of  that  description  of  persons 
in  our  country  already.  Surely  we  ought  not  to  give  encourage- 
ment to  a  species  of  population  which  must  ever  prove  to  the  na- 
tion a  burden  and  not  an  aid.  In  the  event  of  a  foreign  invasion 
we  cannot  expect  to  see  them  assume  any  other  character  than  as 
auxiliaries  of  a  foreign  foe.  In  their  present  condition  they  are  a 
secret  but  deadly  enemy  in  the  heart  of  our  own  country.  They 
wait  but  for  the  moment  when  they  can  have  the  power  of  hostility 
in  their  hands.  They  have  all  been  taught,  and  incredible  as  it 
would  appear,  their  masters  have  been  the  most  assiduous  in  teach- 
ing them  that  slavery  is  a  state  of  perpetual  and  inextinguishable 
war.  That  the  right  of  man  to  liberty  is  unalienable.  That  when- 
ever they  have  it  in  their  power,  it  is  their  right  and  their  duty  to 
cancel  the  bonds  of  their  subjection,  and  break  the  chains  upon 
the  heads  of  their  oppressors.  That  heaven  and  earth  would  con- 
cur to  sanction  their  insurrection,  and  that  in  such  a  contest  the 
Almighty  has  no  attribute  that  could  side  with  us  in  the  cause. 
Can  it  be  imagined  that  these  doctrines  have  been  so  long  and  so 
zealously  inculcated,  without  winning  their  way  to  the  hearts  of 
men  so  powerfully  stimulated  by  every  passion  to  believe  them? 
And  is  it  not  blindness  of  the  most  fatal  kind  to  spur  by  constitu- 
tional temptation  this  continual  augmentation  of  their  numbers? 

Do  I  hear  it  asserted  in  answer  to  all  this  that  the  Constitution 
has  settled  these  questions?  That,  as  it  was  an  instrument  of  com- 
promise, the  representation  for  slaves  was  a  concession  to  the  South- 
ern states.  That  they  held  it  indispensable  for  preserving  the  bal- 
ance of  power,  and  that  they  cannot  be  expected  to  surrender  an 
advantage  which  was  fairly  obtained?  To  this  I  reply  that  the 
course  of  events  since  the  formation  of  the  Constitution  has  given 
a  peculiar  propriety  to  the  change  which  the  legislature  of  Massa- 
chusetts have  instructed  us  to  ask.  If  a  double  representation  was 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  95 

necessary  to  the  Southern  states  to  preserve  the  balance  of  power 
seventeen  years  ago,  it  has  already  become  unnecessary  by  the 
relative  superiority  of  increase  in  their  population  since  that  time. 
And  every  argument  arising  from  the  necessity  of  a  balance  which 
then  could  tend  to  require  an  additional  share  of  representation  for 
those  states,  must  apply  with  equal  force  now  to  induce  them  to 
place  themselves  on  a  footing  of  equality  with  their  sisters.  The 
rapidity  of  their  growth  so  far  exceeds  that  of  the  eastern  states, 
when  combined  with  the  accessions  they  derive  from  the  western 
part  of  the  Union,  that  independent  of  their  negroes  they  have  now 
acquired  the  ascendancy  in  the  proportion  of  numbers,  and  that 
ascendancy  will  become  from  year  to  year  more  decisive.  This 
was  apparently  foreseen  at  the  time  when  the  Constitution  was 
adopted,  and  the  very  regulations  of  the  Constitution  guarding 
against  restraints  on  the  importation  of  slaves,  and  against  direct 
taxes  on  other  proportions  than  those  of  the  census,  are  evidently 
founded  on  such  anticipations.  The  very  stipulation  against 
changes  in  these  points  prior  to  a  given  period  evince  an  opinion, 
that  when  the  time  should  have  clasped  those  changes  might  and 
probably  would  become  advisable,  as  well  as  the  opinion  of  the 
states  most  interested  in  the  subject  that  they  might,  after  such 
lapse  of  time,  be  made  with  perfect  safety  to  them. 

Another  consideration  upon  which  the  states  which  have  no 
slaves  or  no  representation  for  slaves  may  reasonably  require  to 
stand  on  equal  ground  with  the  other  is  the  character  which  our 
national  administration  has  given  to  this  Confederation  under  the 
present  government.  To  support  the  burdens  of  the  government 
and  for  the  discharge  of  the  national  debt,  it  was  obviously  con- 
templated at  the  formation  of  the  Constitution  that  some  other 
mode  of  taxation  besides  duties  of  impost  and  on  navigation  would 
necessarily  be  resorted  to.  It  has,  however,  gradually  become  ex- 
clusively the  policy  of  the  government  to  lay  the  whole  load  of 
taxation  upon  that  single  resource.  The  direct  tax,  which  has  but 
once  been  attempted,1  was  found  so  obnoxious  to  those  very  states 
1  A  direct  tax  of  $2,000,000,  imposed  under  the  law  of  July  14,  1798. 


96  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

which  on  the  basis  of  payment  under  this  tax  alone  for  their  negroes 
have  a  double  share  of  representation,  that  in  two  of  them  it  has 
been  found  impossible  to  raise  their  assessment  of  it.  And  the 
internal  taxes,  which  contributed  heretofore  in  some  degree  to  the 
revenues  of  the  country,  have  been  so  dissatisfactory  to  our  present 
administration,  that  they  have  been  all  repealed,  to  heap  on  the 
load  of  impost,  too  heavily  aggravated  before,  an  additional  sum 
fully  equal  to  their  proceeds.  Thus,  sir,  the  whole  revenues  of  the 
United  States,  as  far  as  they  are  a  burden  upon  the  people,  are  now 
collected  from  the  commercial  states  alone.  The  ten  states  which 
have  no  representation  for  slaves  in  the  councils  of  the  Union,  in 
the  year  1802,  the  latest  of  which  we  have  the  documents,  con- 
tributed three-fourths  of  the  net  revenue  collected  by  impost,  ton- 
nage and  navigation.  And  the  seven  states,  whose  slaves  count 
to  make  members  of  Congress,  contributed  only  one-fourth.  Or  to 
be  more  perfectly  accurate,  the  whole  amount  of  net  revenue  col- 
lected from  that  source  throughout  the  United  States  was 
$8,359,227.96  of  which  sum  $6,103,898.69  was  collected  in  the  ten 
slaveless  states.  This  is  the  proportion  of  taxation  and  contribu- 
tion to  the  public  burdens.  Now  what  is  the  proportion  of  repre- 
sentation for  the  same  states.  They  have  only  seventy-eight 
members  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  where  the  others  have 
sixty-four,  fifteen  of  whom  are  added  in  consequence  of  the  black 
population.  Thus  the  same  portion  of  the  Union  which  contributes 
in  the  proportion  of  three  to  one,  shares  the  representation  largely 
in  the  proportion  of  seven  to  six.  Should  the  genuine  republican 
principle  of  representation  proportioned  to  the  numbers  of  free  in- 
habitants be  established,  the  same  states,  who  would  thereby  lose 
fifteen  members,  would  still  be  highly  favored  in  their  portion, 
since  they  would  be  represented  in  the  ratio  of  two  to  three,  while 
their  tribute  to  the  treasury  would  be  only  as  one  to  three. 

A  final  and  decisive  reason,  however,  which  appears  to  dictate 
the  change  which  we  request  in  the  Constitution,  is  that  by  ex- 
perience it  has  been  proved  that  the  provisions  of  the  Constitution 
in  this  article  are  impracticable  of  execution.  The  Constitution 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  97 

has  here  indissolubly  connected  together  the  proportions  of  direct 
taxation  and  representation;  the  one  of  these  provisions  is  made  as 
the  consideration  of  the  other,  and  indeed  the  expressions  used 
are  such  as  to  make  of  both  parts  only  one  compounded  proposi- 
tion. Representation  and  direct  taxation  shall  be  apportioned  in 
one  and  the  same  manner.  If  one  part  of  the  provision  then  is 
found  impracticable,  the  whole  must  of  course  be  so  considered. 
The  attempt  has  been  made  and  has  failed.  A  direct  tax  has  once 
been  assessed,  but  has  never  been  levied  on  those  very  states  which 
derive  the  largest  accession  to  the  representative  part  of  the  regu- 
lation from  the  numbers  of  their  slaves.  Hence,  as  the  Constitu- 
tion now  stands,  it  bears  with  fourfold  hardship  on  the  states 
without  representation  of  slaves.  Of  all  revenues  raised  on  the 
Union  by  indirect  taxation  three-fourths  are  levied  upon  them,  and 
instead  of  paying  less  of  direct  taxes  than  their  sisters  they  pay 
more.  Nay,  should  such  a  tax  ever  again  be  resorted  to  they  must 
expect  to  pay  the  whole.  For  the  example  of  South  Carolina  and 
Georgia  has  proved  that  the  government  has  not  the  power  to 
raise  the  tax,  where  there  is  an  unwillingness  to  pay  it,  and  such  an 
example  is  too  alluring  not  to  find  multitudes  of  imitators.  I  must 
be  permitted  to  dwell  with  a  peculiar  stress  upon  this  fact;  the 
non-payment  of  the  direct  tax  in  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  has 
not  been  occasioned  by  their  inability.  Blest  with  a  mild  and 
genial  climate  and  a  fertile  soil,  they  have  always  enjoyed  the 
advantage  of  producing  the  articles  which  constitute  the  richest 
source  of  our  wealth,  and  within  a  few  years  they  have  added  to 
their  riches  the  incalculably  valuable  article  of  cotton.  In  our 
eastern  states  the  climate  is  severe,  the  soil  comparatively  barren. 
Nature  treats  us  like  a  stepmother,  and  throws  us  upon  the  world 
with  a  double  portion  of  the  original  curse  to  which  man  was 
doomed,  of  earning  his  bread  in  the  sweat  of  his  brow.  Besides 
the  toils  to  which  we  are  destined  for  subsistence,  we  must  submit 
to  other  toils  for  guarding  against  the  inclemency  of  the  season. 
While  the  Carolinian  may  bask  in  the  rays  of  a  genial  sun  nearly 
the  whole  year  round,  the  New  Englandman  must  employ  one-half 


98  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

of  it  to  preserve  himself  and  his  cattle  from  perishing  during  the 
other.  Instead  of  that  luxuriant  vegetation  which  furnishes  the 
materials  for  luxurious  life,  his  own  lands  will  not  even  yield  him 
bread  of  a  finer  grain  than  the  native  maize;  he  must  purchase  from 
the  South  that  first  of  all  articles  of  subsistence,  and  depend  upon 
other  climes  and  regions  than  his  own  for  the  staff  of  life.  The 
rapidity  and  greatness  of  increase  of  wealth  among  the  citizens  of 
South  Carolina  and  Georgia  during  the  last  two  years  has  been 
a  subject  of  universal  notoriety  and  of  general  congratulation 
throughout  the  Union;  and  yet  it  is  in  the  midst  of  this  unexampled 
and  unrivalled  prosperity  that  the  government  has  been  unable  in 
those  very  states  to  raise  a  small  direct  tax,  which  from  the  slave- 
less  states  has  been  exacted  to  the  utmost  cent. 

To  the  states  whose  slaves  contribute  to  their  representation 
another  inducement  may  be  urged  for  resigning  this  unequal  privi- 
lege. By  the  new  acquisition  of  Louisiana  they  have  an  early 
prospect  of  adding  another  state  with  its  equal  number  of  Senators 
in  this  body,  and  with  a  rapidly  increasing  number  of  members  for 
the  other  branch  of  the  legislature.  From  the  nature  of  the  country 
and  its  innumerable  attractions  to  settlement  it  may  reasonably  be 
expected  that  in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  instead  of  one  state  they 
will  branch  into  five  or  six.  All  these  will  of  course  throw  their 
whole  weight  into  the  scale  of  that  influence  which  belongs  to  the 
southern  section  of  the  Union.  This  was  certainly  never  contem- 
plated at  the  formation  of  our  national  compact,  and  it  will  un- 
doubtedly suffice  to  give  the  states  possessing  slaves  an  ascendancy 
in  the  affairs  of  the  country  which  ought  to  satisfy  them.  And 
when  we  consider  that  the  price  we  are  to  pay  for  the  purchase  of 
that  country,  principal  and  interest,  is  already  charged  upon  our 
duties  of  impost  and  tonnage  —  upon  these  very  revenues  of  which 
the  ten  slaveless  states  furnish  three-fourths  —  it  must  appear  the 
most  cruel  of  hardships  thus  in  a  manner  to  lay  upon  them  the 
whole  burden  of  acquisition  which  is  to  annihilate  all  their  weight 
and  influence,  and  to  leave  their  interests  wholly  at  the  mercy  of 
the  rest. 


. 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  99 

Among  the  objections  which  have  been  made  against  this  meas- 
ure it  has  been  said,  that  the  representation  for  slaves  was  given 
as  an  equivalent  for  the  equal  representation  of  the  states  in  the 
Senate;  that  it  was  a  concession  of  the  small  to  the  large  states; 
and  in  some  of  the  newspaper  discussions  upon  the  subject  the  ad- 
vocates of  the  slavish  representation  have  with  some  exultation 
offered  to  give  up  this  privilege,  on  condition  that  the  representa- 
tion in  the  Senate  shall  be  proportioned  according  to  numbers,  like 
that  in  the  other  house.  If  this  argument  is  offered  with  sincerity, 
it  only  proves  that  those  who  advance  it  are  very  bad  proficients 
in  common  arithmetic.  I  speak  of  its  sincerity  as  problematical, 
because  every  man  who  has  attentively  considered  our  Constitution 
must  know  that  equal  representation  in  the  Senate  was  a  point 
reserved  as  a  sine  qua  non  by  the  small  states,  upon  which  they  were 
determined  to  listen  to  no  compromise  whatsoever.  This  and  this 
alone  they  insisted  upon  placing  beyond  the  reach  even  of  a  Con- 
stitutional amendment.  It  was  the  only  remnant  of  their  sover- 
eignty which  they  retained  under  the  new  government  of  the 
Union,  and  its  equivalent  is  to  be  found  not  in  the  representation 
of  slaves,  but  in  the  proportionate  representation  of  numbers  in  the 
other  house,  and  in  the  manner  of  electing  the  executive.  Now  the 
principle  of  representation  in  proportion  is  not  at  all  affected  by  the 
amendment  which  we  are  instructed  to  propose,  and  which  my 
colleague  has  offered.  Far  from  infringing  upon  the  principle  of 
proportion  its  only  object  is  to  establish  it  upon  a  fair  and  equal 
basis  —  to  make  the  numbers  of  representatives  correspond  with 
the  numbers  of  their  constituents. 

But  a  clear  proof  that  the  equal  representation  in  the  Senate 
was  not  a  concession  on  the  part  of  the  slave-holding  states  to 
those  who  have  no  slaves  is  that  they  themselves,  the  slave  owners, 
are  the  gainers  by  that  very  equal  representation.  A  simple  process 
by  the  rule  of  three  will  show  this.  Under  the  rule  of  equal  repre- 
sentation in  the  Senate  the  ten  states  without  slaves  have  twenty 
members  in  this  body.  The  seven  others  have  fourteen.  Now  if 
the  slavish  three-fifths  were  abolished,  and  the  representation  in 


/*  "1     •'   '  ? 

tHL 

-4-       &-       j.      O"     * 


ioo  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

both  houses  was  proportioned  to  numbers  of  free  inhabitants;  if 
the  ratio  in  the  Senate  were  such  as  to  give  the  ten  slaveless  states 
the  same  number  of  members  they  now  have,  that  is,  twenty,  the 
seven  other  states  would  have  only  twelve,  and  of  course  would 
lose  two  members.  If  they  should  have  fourteen  members,  their 
present  number,  then  the  ten  states  without  slaves  would  have 
twenty-two  members,  and  consequently  gain  two.  If  the  whole 
number  of  senators  should  be  the  same  as  at  present,  thirty-four, 
the  proportion  would  then  be  of  one  senator  for  every  one  hundred 
and  twenty-eight  thousand  souls,  which  would  give  to  the  ten 
slaveless  states  twenty-one,  and  to  the  other  seven,  thirteen  sen- 
ators; or  in  other  words  the  former  would  gain  one,  and  the 
latter  would  lose  one  of  their  present  numbers  of  senators.  So 
that  in  either  view  of  the  subject  the  loss  on  the  part  of  the  slave 
owners,  and  the  gain  on  the  part  of  the  other  states,  would  be  of 
two  members,  equivalent  to  the  vote  of  one  whole  state. 

TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

24  December,  1804. 
DEAR  SIR: 

When  I  expressed  a  wish  in  writing  to  my  brother,  that 
you  should  purposely  dismiss  some  part  of  that  attention  to 
the  present  course  of  public  affairs  which  I  thought  con- 
tributed much  to  make  your  hours  unpleasant,  I  was  not 
aware  that  your  expectations  of  change  in  the  politics  of  a 
considerable  portion  of  the  States,  more  favorable  to  the 
real  interests  and  morals  of  the  country,  were  so  sanguine. 
As  change  is  the  only  permanent  characteristic  feature  in  our 
governments  and  constitutions,  I  cannot  pretend  to  dispute 
the  possibility  of  such  an  event.  But  as  change  for  the  worse 
has  been  for  many  years  uniform  and  unvaried  in  its  progress, 
as  it  still  continues  with  increasing  violence  and  rapidity,  and 
as  I  see  no  source  from  which  a  turn  towards  change  of  a 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  101 

more  propitious  character  can  be  foreseen  with  any  color  of 
reason,  I  cannot  say  that  any  of  my  anticipations  are  of  a 
complexion  so  fair  as  those  which  afford  you  comfort  amid 
the  present  lowering  aspect  of  things.  I  have  indeed  a 
consolation  of  a  different  sort.  I  believe  the  growth  and 
prosperity  of  this  country  to  rest  upon  such  foundations 
that  all  the  vices  and  follies  of  the  people  or  of  their  govern- 
ments, be  they  what  they  may,  will  not  be  able  to  counteract 
them.  This  prosperity  which  is  founded  upon  our  situation 
and  the  course  of  nature  I  rely  upon  with  great  confidence; 
but  as  much  as  I  depend  upon  the  dispensations  of  Provi- 
dence, just  so  little  is  my  confidence  in  the  wisdom  and  virtue 
of  men. 

Hitherto  the  session  of  Congress  has  been  remarkable 
more  for  its  inactivity  than  anything  else.  The  object  of 
principal  expectation  is  the  impeachment  of  Mr.  Chase,  who 
is  summoned  to  make  his  appearance  before  the  Senate  the 
second  day  of  next  month.  The  bills  for  preserving  peace 
in  the  ports  and  harbors,  for  regulating  the  clearance  of 
armed  vessels,  and  for  establishing  a  prize  court  in  the 
Mediterranean,  have  not  yet  got  through  the  House  of 
Representatives.  They  are  liable  to  considerable  objection, 
and  are  found  upon  discussion  liable  to  greater  objections 
than  appear  to  have  been  anticipated.  I  dislike  them  all 
three,  though  I  believe  something  ought  to  be  done  upon 
each  of  the  cases  to  which  they  apply. 

Our  proposition  for  an  amendment  to  the  Constitution  has 
not  yet  been  taken  up,  and  indeed  it  probably  will  have  no 
discussion  this  session.  So  many  of  the  state  legislatures 
have  already  declared  against  it,  without  one  instance  of 
adoption  or  approbation,  not  even  by  Connecticut,  that  it 
would  be  absurd  to  spend  time  in  haranguing  upon  it  here. 
The  time  will  come  when  its  real  merits  will  meet  proper 


102  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1804 

investigation.  But  at  present  the  people  of  Massachusetts 
themselves  appear  to  have  disavowed  the  act  of  their  own 
legislature  supporting  their  rights  and  interests.  What 
they  do  not  choose  to  ask,  they  may  rest  assured  their 
neighbors  will  not  be  anxious  to  grant. 

General  Turreau,  the  French  Minister,  is  in  great  distress 
on  account  of  his  wife,  Secretary,  and  part  of  his  family, 
who  sailed  from  Nantes  for  New  York  more  than  three 
months  ago,  and  have  not  been  heard  of.  He  has  with  him 
only  an  aid-de-camp,  a  young  man  by  name  of  Marin,  ap- 
parently qualified  for  certain  parts  of  diplomatic  duty  to  an 
extraordinary  degree.  His  department  of  negotiation  must 
be  intended  to  be  among  the  ladies.  Fashions,  amusements, 
dress,  and  everything  relating  to  the  bon  ton  de  la  societe,  he 
understands  to  perfection  and  descants  upon  with  great 
eloquence.  He  is  also  a  great  musical  performer,  singer  and 
composer;  a  soldier,  withal,  who  has  fought  all  the  Italian 
campaigns  with  the  Emperor,  and  an  Adonis  in  dress  and 
manners.  He  is  already  quite  an  intimate  in  all  the  musical 
families,  and  of  course  in  ours.  I  have  had  conversation 
with  him  on  the  state  of  things  in  his  country,  and  find  him 
as  capable  of  serious  reflection  and  acute  observation  upon 
subjects  of  importance  as  upon  trifles. 

I  have  had  this  morning  a  little  wrestling  bout  with  our 
present  sovereign,  Mr.  Giles,  who  rules  without  control  as 
Lord  of  the  ascendant.  He  has  been  plunging  us  from  one 
absurdity  to  another,  until  we  had  got  so  deep  that  it  was 
impossible  to  bear  it  any  longer.  The  history  of  the  morn- 
ing's debate  would  be  curious,  but  too  long  to  detail  to  you 
at  present.1  I  moved  a  very  simple  and  trivial  amendment, 
which  happened  to  touch  upon  his  most  irritable  tendon 
and  brought  his  majority  into  great  perplexity  between  the 

1  Adams,  Memoirs,  December  24,   1804. 


1804]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  103 

absolute  necessity  of  making  the  amendment  which  I  pro- 
posed, and  the  equally  absolute  necessity  of  avoiding  to  aid 
or  abet  me  in  mutiny  against  his  authority.  What  think 
you  was  the  final  expedient?  The  same  which  Plutarch 
tells  us  was  once  practised  in  Athens.  You  remember,  when 
a  proposition  was  made  by  a  citizen  of  an  infamous  char- 
acter (that  is,  I  suppose  he  was  of  the  minority),  Aristides,  I 
think  it  was,  considered  it  so  useful  in  itself,  but  so  disgraced 
by  the  introducer,  that  he  moved  the  same  proposition  should 
be  introduced  by  a  respectable  citizen.  Now  in  order  to  make 
it  possible  for  the  majority  to  vote  for  my  proposition  against 
Mr.  Giles,  General  Jackson,  and  I  was  much  obliged  to  him 
for  it,  undertook  the  part  of  the  respectable  citizen  and 
introduced  my  amendment  by  a  mere  variation  of  phrase, 
whereby  it  carried  a  large  majority.  This  is  the  first  time 
Giles  has  got  a  trip  this  session,  and  he  will  not  forget  it.  He 
has  been  very  pointed  in  his  civility  to  me,  out  of  doors,  and 
in  conversation  whenever  we  have  met.  I  am  thankful  to 
him  for  even  this.  His  power  is  such  that  if  he  should  move 
my  expulsion  from  the  Senate  because  he  does  not  like  my 
looks,  he  would  stand  a  very  fair  chance  of  success.  But 
he  has  nothing  insolent  in  his  manner,  which  cannot  be  said 
of  all  his  associates. 

We  have  had  a  proposal  to  adjourn  over  this  week,  but  it 
did  not  succeed.    We  are  to  meet  again  on  Wednesday. 
Yours  faithfully. 


io4  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1805 

TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

WASHINGTON,  5  January,  1805. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

•  •••••• 

Mr.  Giles  continues  to  be  our  Director,  and  in  general 
meets  with  little  opposition  to  what  he  thinks  beneficial  to 
the  public  service.  He  has  lost  much  of  the  vehemence  in  his 
manner  which  struck  me  when  I  first  heard  him  speak  in 
public,  in  1791.  And  he  treats  his  opponents  with  a  very 
pointed  civility.  I  wish  his  principles  had  moderated  in  pro- 
portion to  his  manners. 

The  Vice  President 1  is  treated  by  his  former  friends  with 
a  degree  of  distinction  and  respect  to  which  he  had  before 
this  session  long  been  a  stranger.  His  case  is  held  out  as 
being  eminently  entitled  to  compassion.  He  seems  to  be 
under  a  deeper  personal  obligation  to  one  member  of  the 
Senate  2  than  from  his  situation  he  ought  to  be,  and  the 
effect  of  this  obligation  is  too  perceptible  on  his  conduct  as 
President. 

I  am,  etc. 

TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

WASHINGTON,  24  January,  1805. 

•  »••••• 

Though  I  find  it  utterly  impossible  ever  to  read  all  these 
papers  [public  documents],  yet  I  feel  it  an  indispensable 
duty  to  peruse  with  attention  the  greater  part  of  them,  and 
some  of  them  require  even  a  larger  portion  of  time  than  that. 

1  Burr. 

2  Giles. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  105 

When  to  this  you  add  the  necessary  attendance  upon  my 
duty  in  the  Senate,  and  the  part  which  the  same  sense  of 
duty  leads  me  to  take  in  many  of  its  deliberations,  I  hope 
you  will  acquit  me  of  any  neglect  arising  either  from  indo- 
lence, or  from  an  underestimate  of  the  advantages  I  derive 
from  your  letters.  It  is  indeed  possible  that  I  may  indulge 
a  solicitude  too  anxious  for  my  personal  and  political  situa- 
tion, with  respect  to  the  business  which  comes  before  Con- 
gress. Most  of  the  gentlemen,  with  whom  I  must  commonly 
concur  in  opinion,  seem  to  think  that  we  may  as  well  discard 
in  a  great  degree  our  concern  relative  to  the  public  business, 
as  we  can  be  under  no  responsibility,  and  as  nothing  we  can 
say  or  do  will  ever  be  of  any  avail  to  the  service.  There 
appears  to  me,  however,  some  danger  in  this  listless  abandon- 
ment of  the  affairs  of  the  nation,  and  if  little  or  no  good  can 
be  done  by  the  most  assiduous  of  our  exertions,  I  think  we 
have  the  experience  that  much  mischief  may  be  prevented. 

Your  fundamental  principles  for  pointing  out  the  proper 
organization  of  government,  that  it  is  to  control  and  direct 
the  operations  of  emulation,  I  fully  believe,  and  on  the  theory 
of  government  generally,  to  judge  of  the  depth  and  compass 
of  knowledge,  genius  and  virtue  among  the  statesmen  who 
have  made  constitutions  for  these  states,  I  believe  you 
could  have  nothing  to  wish  but  a  comparison  of  the  Massa- 
chusetts constitution  with  any  other  that  ever  has  been 
made  in  this  country.  To  this  comparative  estimate  I  have 
recently  been  called  by  having  my  attention  called  to  the 
collection  of  our  constitutions,  with  relation  to  a  different 
subject.  The  only  part  of  your  system  upon  which  a  doubt 
in  my  mind  remains,  is  whether  the  balance,  in  its  most  per- 
fect state,  is  so  efficacious  to  control  the  effects  of  emulation, 
as  you  suppose. 

I  have  never  in  my  gloomiest  moments  considered  my 


106  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1805 

situation  as  of  so  trying  or  severe  a  nature  as  was  yours 
during  the  whole  period  of  our  revolutionary  controversy; 
but  you  had  the  advantage  of  a  great  and  powerful  consola- 
tion which  totally  fails  to  me,  and  that  was,  the  honor  and 
profit  which  you  never  failed  to  derive  from  your  profession. 
I  have  had  experience  and  acquired  self-knowledge  enough 
to  be  convinced  that  from  my  profession  neither  profit  nor 
honor  will  ever  derive  to  me.  Not  that  I  reluct  at  any  toil 
of  mind  or  body,  not  being  conscious  that  the  dread  or  aver- 
sion of  labor  is  among  my  deficiencies;  but  that  from  both 
natural  and  adventitious  circumstances  in  my  composition 
and  life,  the  bar  is  not  my  element. 

We  are  here  in  a  state  of  momentary  calm,  which  perhaps 
may  be  the  presage  of  a  violent  storm.  The  recession  of  the 
District  of  Columbia  has  taken  four  days  debate  in  the  House 
of  Representatives,  and  then  rejected  by  a  large  majority. 
The  clearance  bill  entirely  renovated  will  probably  come  for 
discussion  again  next  week.  Mr.  Crowninshield  has  also  of- 
fered a  resolution  which  will  furnish  materials,  if  not  for  leg- 
islation, at  least  for  eloquent  speeches.  On  the  4th  of  next 
month  is  to  come  on  the  trial  of  the  impeachment.  If  this 
proceeds,  it  will  probably  suspend  in  a  great  degree  all  the 
other  business  of  the  session. 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

WASHINGTON,  8  March,  1805. 
DEAR  SIR: 

During  the  last  days  of  the  session  of  Congress  which  has 
just  expired,  I  found  it  impossible  to  continue  the  corre- 
spondence which  I  had  previously  maintained  even  so  far  as 
to  enclose  from  day  to  day  the  public  documents  as  they  were 


i8oS]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  107 

printed.  From  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  until  seven  in  the 
evening  the  Senate  was  constantly  in  session,  with  the  in- 
terval of  only  half  an  hour  each  day  for  a  slight  collation, 
which  the  members  took  at  the  Capitol  itself;  and  this,  to- 
gether with  a  walk  of  an  hour  to  reach  that  place,  and  a  walk 
of  an  hour  to  return  from  it,  scarcely  left  me  the  hours  of  the 
night  for  repose.  The  scene  has  now  closed.  On  Sunday 
evening  last,  the  3rd  instant,  at  half  past  nine  o'clock,  the 
two  Houses  adjourned  without  day,  and  thus  terminated  a 
session  which  it  was  high  time  to  bring  to  an  end;  a  session 
which  has  been  the  parent  of  several  legislative  acts,  im- 
portant in  themselves  and  promising  still  more  important 
consequences.  The  attention  both  of  Congress  and  of  the 
public  to  these  has,  however,  been  almost  swallowed  up  in 
the  interest  and  anxiety  with  which  every  step  of  the  judicial 
transactions,  which  have  engrossed  so  large  a  portion  of  our 
time,  has  been  followed  and  scrutinized.  On  the  subject  of 
Mr.  Chase's  impeachment,  until  the  sentence  was  pro- 
nounced, I  felt  myself  under  an  obligation  to  impose  absolute 
silence  upon  my  pen,  and,  as  far  as  human  infirmity  would 
admit,  upon  my  tongue.  Even  now,  it  is  a  subject  upon 
which  it  would  perhaps  be  most  discreet  for  those  who  were 
called  to  decide  upon  the  articles  to  observe  a  dignified  and 
unaffected  silence.  The  questions  of  guilt  or  innocence  as 
they  affect  the  man  are  probably  at  rest;  but  the  spirit 
which  impelled  to  the  prosecution,  and  in  which  its  highest 
importance  consisted,  is  so  far  from  being  subdued  or 
abashed,  that  you  will  perceive  it  has  burst  forth  with  re- 
doubled violence  from  its  defeat,  and  finding  itself  baffled 
by  an  unexpected  resistance  to  the  stroke  it  aimed  at  judicial 
independence,  has  not  only  taken  a  more  pointed  and  deadly 
aim  at  that,  but  coupled  it  with  another  blow  directed  at  the 
Senate  itself.  These  will  probably  be  the  subject  of  future 


io8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1805 

contestation,  and  may  perhaps  bring  to  the  test  the  validity 
of  some  principles  upon  which  our  constitutions  stand,  and 
which  have  never  yet  been  tried  by  the  touchstone  of  ex- 
perience. 

The  attack  by  impeachment  upon  the  judicial  department 
of  our  national  government  began  two  years  ago,  and  has 
been  conducted  with  great  address  as  well  as  with  persever- 
ing violence.  The  impeachment  and  conviction  of  Mr.  Pick- 
ering, of  a  man  notoriously  and  confessedly  insane,  for  acts 
committed  in  that  state,  and  during  the  whole  course  of  the 
impeachment  remaining  in  it,  was  but  a  preparatory  step 
to  the  assault  upon  Judge  Chase,  as  this  in  its  turn  was  un- 
questionably intended  to  pave  the  way  for  another  prosecu- 
tion, which  would  have  swept  the  supreme  judicial  bench 
clean  at  a  stroke.  As  the  experiment  in  the  case  of  Mr. 
Pickering  was  completely  successful,  I  confess  I  have  been 
disappointed,  agreeably  disappointed,  in  the  issue  of  the  suc- 
ceeding step.  It  was  impossible  to  establish  by  a  stronger 
case  than  that,  the  principle  that  criminality  was  not  an 
essential  ingredient  of  impeachable  offenses.  And  upon  the 
score  of  humanity  it  would  have  been  certainly  a  much  less 
odious  transaction  to  convict  and  remove  a  man  of  the  first 
parts,  after  a  full  and  solemn  trial  for  peccadilloes  of  temper 
stretched  into  crimes  and  misdemeanors,  than  to  pass  a  like 
degrading  and  defaming  sentence  upon  one  visited  with  the 
heaviest  of  human  calamities,  and  to  make  that  awful  visita- 
tion of  God  itself  the  basis  of  the  prosecution.  I  can,  indeed, 
never  reflect  upon  the  proceedings  and  judgments  in  that 
cruel  affair  without  dejection  of  heart  and  humiliation  of 
spirit.  I  feel  for  the  honor  of  the  body  to  which  I  belong, 
and  for  the  honor  of  my  country,  sullied  as  they  are  by  a 
sentence  of  guilt,  inflicted  upon  a  man  for  being  among  the 
most  miserable  of  the  human  race,  for  being  bereft  by  the 


i8oS]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  109 

hand  of  heaven  of  that  attribute,  which  by  rendering  man 
rational  would  render  him  accountable.  Nor  can  I  satis- 
factorily explain  to  myself  how  it  has  happened,  that  the 
same  men,  who  would  be  prevailed  upon  to  sanction  by  a 
judgment  pronounced  under  oath  what  to  my  mind  appears 
so  flagrant  a  violation  of  all  justice  and  decency,  should  now 
stop  and  make  an  effectual  stand  in  support  of  fair  and 
honorable  principle  against  this  inroad  of  turbulent  ambition. 
There  is  indeed  one  way  of  solving  the  difficulty  which  some- 
times presents  itself  to  my  mind  as  probable,  and  which,  if 
just,  may  be  a  foundation  for  substantial  hope  in  future. 
The  trial  of  Pickering  did  not  sufficiently  develop  the  in- 
tentions of  those  by  whom  it  was  managed.  It  did  not  dis- 
close the  full  extent  of  their  views.  But  when  it  was  seen 
that  on  the  very  day  of  his  conviction  the  impeachment  of 
Mr.  Chase  was  voted,  and  when  the  application  of  those 
absurd  doctrines  upon  which  he  had  been  construed  into  a 
criminal  was  instantly  extended  to  a  judge  of  the  Supreme 
Court,  with  undisguised  intimations  that  it  would  soon  be 
spread  over  the  whole  of  that  Bench,  some  of  those  whose 
weakness  had  yielded  to  the  torrent  of  popular  prejudice  in 
the  first  instance,  had  the  integrity  to  reflect,  rallied  all  their 
energy  to  assist  them,  and  took  a  stand  which  has  arrested 
for  a  time  that  factious  impetuosity  that  threatens  to  bury 
all  our  national  institutions  in  one  common  ruin. 

There  were  circumstances  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Pickering 
which  might  at  once  contribute  to  veil  the  designs  of  his 
prosecutors,  and  to  apologize  for  the  compliance  of  his 
judges.  The  acts  for  which  he  was  impeached  were  com- 
mitted in  a  state  of  intoxication,  and  although  it  was  abun- 
dantly proved  that  his  habits  of  this  nature  were  produced 
by  the  alienation  of  his  mind  into  which  he  had  fallen,  and 
only  aggravated  its  symptoms,  yet  there  was  some  color  for 


no  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1805 

considering  a  man  whom  his  family  and  friends  suffered  to 
go  at  large  and  take  his  seat  on  the  Bench,  as  justly  answer- 
able for  his  conduct  there.  The  end  too  must  go  some  way 
in  that  instance  to  justify  the  means.  For  the  office  of  a 
judge  Mr.  Pickering  was  utterly  disqualified,  and  as  the 
sentence  went  only  to  removal,  the  effect  worked  no  injus- 
tice and  might  reconcile  to  the  irregularity  of  the  process. 
Besides  all  this,  it  must  be  added  that  the  judgment  was 
obtained  with  great  difficulty,  and  after  more  than  one  in- 
ternal struggle  in  the  party  to  pursue  a  more  honorable  course 
of  proceeding.  Three  members  of  the  Senate,  adherents  of 
the  present  administration,  purposely  absented  themselves 
on  the  day  when  the  sentence  passed.  Others  had  absented 
themselves  still  earlier,  probably  from  the  same  motive,  and 
his  conviction  was  finally  effected  by  a  bare  majority  of  the 
whole  Senate.  Of  those  who  remained  and  voted  I  am  cer- 
tain several  voted  with  extreme  reluctance,  and  by  a  sacrifice 
of  their  own  judgments  to  the  domineering  dictates  of  the 
managers  from  the  House,  and  an  unreflected  acquiescence 
in  the  doctrines  which  were  then  first  advanced,  that  im- 
peachment, though  for  crimes  and  misdemeanors,  was  not  a 
criminal  prosecution,  a  doctrine  which  they  were  content  to 
take  for  sound,  as  it  suited  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  then 
wanted,  and  the  consequences  of  which  they  did  not  then 
stay  to  investigate. 

It  is  even  possible  that  the  proceedings  on  that  trial  may 
have  tended  to  produce  an  effect  of  counteraction  upon  that 
of  the  present  session.  At  least  the  doctrine  concerning  im- 
peachment then  broached,  and  which  Pickering's  sentence 
seemed  to  sanction,  was  at  the  commencement  of  this  session 
carried  to  such  an  extreme,  that  its  first  check  was  seen  in  a 
glaring  absurdity  of  its  own  detection.  We  were  seriously 
told  in  long  and  studied  speeches  that  impeachment,  so  far 


i8oS]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  in 

from  being  a  criminal  prosecution,  was  no  prosecution  at  all. 
That  the  Senate,  sitting  for  the  purpose  of  trying  impeach- 
ment, was  not  a  court,  and  that  it  ought  not  to  derive  its 
forms  or  rules  of  proceeding,  either  from  courts  of  impeach- 
ment in  other  countries,  or  from  any  of  the  judicial  courts 
in  our  own.  It  was  even  intimated  that  not  much  pleading 
ought  to  be  allowed,  and  a  hint  sufficiently  explicit  was 
given,  that  a  general  issue,  a  mere  declaration  of  "not  guilty," 
was  the  only  answer  which  ought  to  be  received  to  the  articles 
charged  by  the  House  of  Representatives.  Conformably  to 
these  opinions  the  word  "  court 5:  was,  in  two  instances  at 
least,  struck  out  of  the  rules  for  proceeding  in  cases  of  im- 
peachment, reported  by  a  committee  at  an  early  period  of 
the  session.  It  was,  however,  necessary  that  the  witnesses 
should  be  sworn.  The  committee  who  reported  the  rules 
had  not  proposed  by  whom  the  oath  should  be  administered. 
A  motion  was  therefore  made  in  Senate  that  this  act  should 
be  performed  by  the  Secretary.  It  gave  rise  to  no  small  de- 
bates, for  upon  the  principles  which  were  so  rapidly  thriving 
and  until  then  so  irresistible  prevailing,  the  Secretary  had  no 
authority  to  administer  an  oath,  and  the  objection  was  taken 
on  that  ground.  Nay,  a  proposal  was  formally  made,  that 
on  the  trial  an  ordinary  magistrate  should  be  called  in  to 
administer  the  oaths.  Of  this  debate  I  gave  you  some 
account  at  the  time  when  it  occurred.  It  was  the  first 
stumbling-block  to  the  new  theory  of  impeachment,  which 
has  never  recovered  from  the  fall  of  that  shock.  When  the 
natural  and  spontaneous  deductions  from  the  system  had 
brought  the  Senate  to  this  dilemma,  of  being  bound  to  try 
an  impeachment  without  possessing  the  power  of  administer- 
ing an  oath,  the  sturdiest  of  its  followers  began  to  stagger. 
The  term  "Court  of  Impeachment "  was  suffered  to  remain 
unexpun-ged  from  the  Journals,  though  its  expulsion  was  re- 


ii2  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1805 

peatedly  threatened.  The  necessary  oaths  were  administered 
by  the  Secretary,  and  an  answer  containing  something  more 
than  a  bare  plea  of  'not  guilty'  was  received  without  ob- 
jection. 

The  trial  itself  was  conducted  with  exemplary  order, 
decorum  and  solemnity.  A  great  mass  of  illegal  and  improper 
evidence  was  indeed  admitted,  but  that  was  always  by  con- 
sent of  the  parties.  Not  only  the  casual  expressions  dropped 
in  private  conversations  among  friends  and  intimates,  as  well 
as  strangers  and  adversaries,  in  the  recess  of  a  bed-chamber 
as  well  as  at  public  taverns  and  in  stage  coaches,  had  been 
carefully  and  malignantly  laid  up  and  preserved  for  testi- 
mony on  this  prosecution;  not  only  more  witnesses  examined 
to  points  of  opinion,  and  called  upon  for  discrimination  to 
such  a  degree  as  to  say  whether  the  deportment  of  the 
Judge  was  imperative  or  imperious,  but  hours  of  interroga- 
tion and  answer  were  consumed  in  evidence  to  looks,  to 
bows,  to  tones  of  voice  and  modes  of  speech  —  to  prove  the 
insufferable  grievance  that  Mr.  Chase  had  more  than  once 
raised  a  laugh  at  the  expense  of  Callender's  counsel,  and  to 
ascertain  the  tremendous  fact  that  he  had  accosted  the 
ATTORNEY  GENERAL  of  Virginia  by  the  appellation  of 
Young  Gentleman  II  If  by  thumbscrews,  the  memory  of  a 
witness  trace  back  for  a  period  of  five  years  the  features  of 
the  Judge's  face,  it  could  be  darkened  with  a  frown,  it  was 
to  be  construed  into  rude  and  contumelious  treatment  of  the 
Virginia  bar;  if  it  was  found  lightened  with  a  smile,  "tyrants 
in  all  ages  had  been  notorious  for  their  pleasantry."  In 
short,  sir,  Gravity  himself  could  not  keep  his  countenance 
at  the  nauseating  littlenesses  which  were  resorted  to  for  proof 
of  atrocious  criminality,  and  indignation  melted  into  ridicule 
at  the  puerile  perseverance  with  which  nothings  were  ac- 
cumulated, with  the  hope  of  making  something  by  their 


i8o5]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  113 

multitude.     All  this,  however,  was  received  because  Judge 
Chase  would  not  suffer  his  counsel  to  object  against  it.    He 
indulged  his  accusers  with  the  utmost  license  of  investigation 
which  they  ever  derived,  and  contented  himself  with  ob- 
serving to  the  court  that  he  expected  to  be  judged  upon  the 
legal  evidence  in  the  case.    The  hearing  was  fair  and  to  all 
appearance  impartial.     The  question  whether  impeachment 
could  be  had  for  acts  not  violating  any  law,  was  discussed 
and  sifted,  until  the  managers  themselves  were  compelled 
to  abandon  it,  at  least  in  its  application  to  the  cause.    The 
form  of  putting  the  final  question  which  had  been  adopted 
in  Pickering's  case  was  abandoned,  almost  without  a  struggle, 
and  another  was  substituted,  conformable  to  the  English 
precedents  and  to  correct  principles.     It  was  taken  on  each 
of  the  eight  articles  separately.    And  although  of  the  thirty- 
four  Senators  present  (for  not  a  member  of  the  body  was 
absent),   twenty-five   were   decided   political   opponents   of 
Mr.  Chase,  there  were  fifteen  who  voted  for  acquittal  upon 
every  article.     On  the  first  article,  the  one  upon  which  the 
great  reliance  of  the  managers  was  placed,  the  only  article 
which  by  its  relation  to  a  trial  for  life  and  death  could  give 
the  gloom  of  darkness  to  the  lightest  shade  of  official  error, 
the  majority  of  the  whole  Senate  was  for  acquittal,  and  two 
among  the  most  inveterate  of  the  judge's  political  antago- 
nists appear  among  the  names  of  those  who  pronounced  him 
not  guilty.     The  eighth  article  was  that  which  united  the 
greatest  number  of  voices  against  him,  and  the  whole  sub- 
stance of  his  offense  in  that  was  the  delivery  of  a  charge  to  a 
Grand  Jury  at  Baltimore,  containing  political  opinions  ob- 
noxious to  the  predominating  sentiments  of  the  day,  and  to 
the  party  now  in  power.    This  was  certainly  not  a  very  pru- 
dent act,  but  even  the  microscope  of  party  spirit  could  not 
magnify  it  into  an  impeachable  misdemeanor.    The  consti- 


n4  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1805 

tutional  majority  necessary  to  convict  could  not  be  obtained 
for  any  of  the  charges  separately,  nor  for  the  whole  taken  to- 
gether, and  by  the  voices  of  determined  political  adversaries 
Judge  Chase  was  acquitted  of  all  the  Articles  of  Impeachment 
preferred  against  him  by  the  House  of  Representatives  of 
the  United  States.  .  .  . 

TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

WASHINGTON,  14  March,  1805. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

In  my  last  letter  I  observed  to  you,  that  the  form  of  putting 
the  final  question  on  the  articles  of  impeachment  against 
Judge  Chase  was  varied  from  that  which  had  been  adopted 
in  the  case  of  Mr.  Pickering,  and  made  conformable  to  the 
English  precedents.  To  show  you  how  essentially  this  va- 
riation of  form  was  connected  with  a  most  important  ques- 
tion as  to  the  nature  of  impeachment  under  our  Constitution, 
I  shall  here  state  the  difference  between  them.  In  Pickering's 
case  the  question  was  "Is  John  Pickering,  District  Judge  of 

New  Hampshire,  guilty  as  charged  in  the Article  ? '    And 

the  answer  given  was  "aye,"  or  "no."  In  Mr.  Chase's  case 
the  question  was  "  Is  Samuel  Chase,  the  respondent,  guilty  or 
not  guilty  of  a  high  crime  or  misdemeanor  as  charged  in  the 
article  just  read?"  And  the  answer  was  "guilty,"  or  "not 
guilty."  Thus  in  this  instance  every  member  of  the  court 
was  by  the  form  of  the  question  called  upon  to  say,  not  only 
whether  the  facts  alleged  in  the  article  were  proved,  but 
whether  they  constituted  a  high  crime  or  misdemeanor, 
whereas  in  the  former  case  that  very  material  point  was 
winked  out  of  sight.  The  members  answered  that  John 
Pickering  was  guilty  as  the  article  alleged,  but  whether  the 
facts  amounted  to  a  high  crime  or  misdemeanor  they  did  not 


i8os]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  115 

undertake  to  say.  One  would  scarcely  conceive  it  possible 
that  in  such  a  body  as  the  Senate  of  the  United  States  the 
acquittal  or  conviction  of  a  man  should  depend  upon  the 
form  of  words  used  for  taking  the  opinion  of  the  members 
on  his  guilt  or  innocence.  But  so  it  was.  The  same  form 
used  at  the  present  time  was  proposed  and  strenuously  con- 
tended for  in  the  former  case,  but  was  then  inflexibly  re- 
jected. I  told  you  that  the  precedent  was  now  abandoned 
almost  without  a  struggle,  but  it  was  not  without  very  strong 
signs  of  reluctance;  nor  do  I  imagine  it  would  have  been 
given  up,  but  that  they,  who  were  most  earnestly  bent  upon 
the  Judge's  conviction,  had  sufficient  indications  to  convince 
them  that  there  was  no  prospect  of  such  result  from  any 
form  of  question  they  could  devise.  On  the  very  day  the 
sentence  was  pronounced  there  was,  indeed,  a  fresh  attempt 
in  Senate  to  prove  that  the  power  of  impeachment  under  our 
Constitution  was  unlimited,  and  the  power  of  conviction 
upon  impeachment  limited  only  by  the  proportion  of  num- 
bers required  to  convict.  But  the  bearing  of  the  argument  on 
the  cause  then  to  be  determined  was  formally  disavowed, 
because  it  was  said  at  all  events  the  articles  charged  against 
Mr.  Chase  were  of  high  crimes  or  misdemeanors.  This  was 
not  altogether  true.  For  besides  the  frivolous  nature  of  the 
charges  contained  in  several  of  the  articles,  it  is  very  remark- 
able that  one  of  them,  differing  from  all  the.  rest,  had  omitted 
even  the  allegation  of  evil  intent.  It  does  not  pretend  to 
charge  anything  more  than  an  error  on  a  point  of  law,  and 
discards  all  the  imputations  of  partiality,  intemperance, 
oppression,  injustice  and  solicitude  to  convict,  with  which 
all  the  other  articles  are  so  profusely  laden.  This  omission 
cannot  be  presumed  to  have  been  unintentional,  and  the 
insertion  of  that  and  the  next  article  (bottomed  upon  the 
very  same  grounds,  but  carefully  resuming  the  allegations 


n6  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1805 

of  oppressive  intent)  afford  the  most  unequivocal  proofs  of  a 
determination  to  establish  the  principle,  that  judges  are 
removable  by  impeachment  for  any  mistake  on  a  point  of 
law.  These  two  articles,  it  must  also  be  remembered,  were 
introduced  as  an  after  thought;  were  no  part  of  the  articles 
reported  at  the  former  session  of  Congress,  and  were  now  first 
brought  forward  after  all  the  reflections  and  meditations  of 
a  seven  months'  recess.  These  articles  contained  in  them- 
selves a  virtual  impeachment  not  only  of  Mr.  Chase,  but  of 
all  the  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  from  the  first  establish- 
ment of  the  national  judiciary.  They  were  founded  on  the 
pretence  that  the  federal  courts  were  bound  to  follow  in  each 
state  of  the  Union  the  modes  of  process  usual  in  that  state. 
Now  one  of  the  earliest  decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  had 
been  directly  contrary  to  this  position,  and  all  the  judges 
had  uniformly  proceeded  in  conformity  to  that  decision.  If 
Mr.  Chase  was  removable  by  impeachment  for  having  thus 
acted  at  Richmond,  he  had  not  an  associate  upon  the  Bench 
but  was  alike  removable  for  having  done  the  same  thing 
elsewhere.  The  fate  of  these  two  articles  and  their  construc- 
tion furnishes  a  curious  specimen  of  the  manner  in  which 
public  bodies  may  be  brought  to  act.  One  of  them,  the  fifth, 
impeached  Judge  Chase  for  issuing  a  capias  against  Callender, 
because  it  says  the  laws  of  Virginia  required  that  a  summons 
should  issue.  The  very  law  of  Virginia  to  which  it  appeals 
expressly  authorizes  the  judges  to  issue  in  the  cases  to  which 
it  refers  a  summons,  or  other  proper  process.  The  article  of 
impeachment  omits  these  last  words  and,  instead  of  a  discre- 
tionary alternative,  recites  the  law  in  peremptory  terms  re- 
quiring a  summons.  And  yet  upon  this  egregious  misrecital 
of  a  statute  as  egregiously  misapplied  did  the  House  of 
Representatives  of  the  United  States,  by  a  majority  of 
seventy  votes  against  forty-five,  vote  an  accusation  against 


i8oS]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  117 

one  of  the  supreme  judges  of  the  land,  upon  which,  had  his 
judges  been  no  more  restrained  than  his  accusers,  he  must 
have  been  disgraced  in  reputation  and  ignominiously  expelled 
from  his  office.  On  this  article  the  vote  of  acquittal  was 
unanimous.  The  strong  stimulus  of  political  animosity, 
aided  by  all  the  perverse  ingenuity  of  party  spirit,  could  not 
devise  an  apology  upon  which  a  single  man  should  dare  to 
say  u guilty'  to  this  charge,  which  seventy  members  of  the 
House  of  Representatives  were  not  ashamed  to  sanction  with 
their  names  upon  the  record  of  accusation. 

President  Jefferson  is  reported  to  have  said  to  a  member 
of  the  Senate,  that  impeachment  was  but  a  clumsy  engine  to 
get  rid  of  judges.  His  warmest  friends  in  both  houses  of 
Congress  are,  I  believe,  by  this  time  tolerably  well  convinced 
of  the  same  thing.  I  do  not  imagine  they  will  very  soon 
attempt  to  ply  it  again.  But  in  its  stead  another  battery 
has  been  opened  upon  the  judiciary,  the  operation  of  which 
only  futurity  can  determine.  Immediately  after  Mr.  Chase 
was  declared  to  be  acquitted  of  all  the  charges  brought 
against  him  by  the  House  of  Representatives,  the  same 
member  l  of  that  House  who  had  originated  and  principally 
conducted  impeachment  offered  to  their  consideration  a 
proposed  amendment  to  the  Constitution,  making  the  judges 
necessarily  removable  upon  a  joint  address  of  the  two 
branches  of  the  legislature  by  simple  majorities.  Another 
of  the  managers,2  the  one  next  him  in  power,  offered,  also,  a 
further  amendment  to  make  the  members  of  the  Senate 
liable  at  any  time  to  be  recalled  by  the  respective  legislatures. 
Both  these  propositions  are  made  the  order  of  the  day  of 
the  House  of  Representatives  for  the  first  day  of  the  next 
session.  These  motions  were  made  just  at  the  pungent 

1  John  Randolph.     Ames,  Proposed  Amendments  to  the  Constitution,  149. 

2  Joseph  Hopper  Nicholson  (1770-1817),  of  Maryland.     Ames,  64. 


n8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1805 

moment  of  disappointment,  and  were  I  think  somewhat 
inconsiderately  offered  at  the  same  time.  I  should  expect 
that  at  the  next  session  the  second  will  be  relinquished,  but 
I  also  believe  the  other  will  be  pursued  with  persevering 
ardor.  As  there  is  much  to  be  said  in  its  favor  as  a  proper 
provision,  independent  of  all  application  to  present  circum- 
stances; as  it  is  recommended,  not  only  by  the  example  of 
Great  Britain,  but  by  some  of  the  best  among  our  state  con- 
stitutions; and  as  it  must  be  in  every  point  of  view  a  desirable 
alteration  to  the  ruling  majority,  there  is  the  strongest  prob- 
ability that  it  will  not  readily  be  abandoned.  Its  success  in 
the  Senate,  however,  will  be  very  problematical,  at  least 
until  another  election  shall  have  intervened.  Several  of  the 
members  of  this  body  besides  those  who  voted  for  the  full 
acquittal  of  Mr.  Chase  were  much  dissatisfied  at  the  measure 
which  so  directly  pointed  at  their  body,  and  their  disgust 
at  that  extended  some  degree  of  disfavor  to  the  other  prop- 
osition with  which  it  was  coupled.  Both  of  them  were 
felt  to  be  intended  to  cast  reflections  upon  the  Senate  itself, 
as  well  as  upon  its  recent  judgment  and  a  sense  of  interest. 
The  honor  and  dignity  of  the  corps  were  discernible  in  the 
sentiments  of  many  members  who  had  gone  the  farthest 
towards  the  conviction  of  the  judges.  The  Senate  is  not 
without  enemies  to  its  own  constitution  within  its  walls,  and 
there  are  more  yet  of  its  members  destitute  of  the  fortitude 
to  resist  encroachments  attempted  by  the  leaders  of  the 
popular  branch  of  the  legislature.  The  cooperation  of  these 
men  may  possibly  be  obtained  to  seal  the  doom  of  the  judicial 
department  in  the  shape  of  an  amendment  to  the  Constitu- 
tion, although  they  have  not  united  to  do  it  by  the  means 
of  impeachment. 

After  the  decision  in  favor  of  Mr.  Chase  and  the  two 
propositions  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  which  I  have 


i8o5]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  119 

noticed,  and  which  all  happened  on  the  same  day,  there  were 
only  two  days  remaining  to  close  the  session;  but  in  those 
two  days  two  incidents  occurred  calculated  to  inspire  an 
expectation,  that  upon  the  crisis  which  appears  to  be  hasten- 
ing upon  us  the  Senate  will  ultimately  prove  true  to  its  own 
honor  and  to  the  highest  interests  of  our  country.  The 
judgment  was  given  on  the  first  of  March.  On  the  second, 
Mr.  Burr,  then  Vice  President,  took  leave  of  the  Senate,  and 
previous  to  quitting  the  chair  delivered  a  valedictory  address 
of  about  twenty  minutes  in  length  which  appeared  to  make, 
and  I  believe  has  left,  a  profound  impression  upon  the  mind 
of  every  person  who  heard  him.  In  this  address  among 
several  other  striking  observations  he  expressed  himself 
nearly  in  these  words: 

And  permit  me  to  recommend  to  you  in  your  future  deliberations 
inflexibly  to  maintain  and  to  cherish  those  habits  of  order  and 
regularity  which  upon  experience  are  found  to  be  intimately  con- 
nected with  important  principles.  On  a  superficial  view  only  they 
appear  of  inconsiderable  consequence,  but  on  full  investigation  it 
will  be  discovered  that  there  is  scarce  a  departure  from  order  but 
leads  to,  or  is  indissolubly  connected  with,  a  departure  from 
morality.  This  body  is  growing  in  importance.  It  is  here,  if  any- 
where, that  our  country  must  ultimately  find  the  anchor  of  her 
safety;  here  the  stand  is  to  be  made  at  once  against  the  storms  of 
faction,  the  silent  arts  of  corruption,  and,  if  the  Constitution  is  to 
perish,  which  may  God  avert,  and  which  I  do  not  believe,  its  dying 
agonies  will  be  witnessed  upon  this  floor. 

The  allusion  to  the  circumstances  which  had  just  taken 
place  was  obvious,  and  it  appeared  to  me  there  was  not  a 
member  present  but  felt  the  force  of  this  solemn  appeal  to 
his  sense  of  duty. 

On  the  same  day  a  difference  between  the  two  Houses 
arose  upon  a  bill  making  provision  for  payment  of  the  wit- 


120  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1805 

nesses  summoned  to  attend  the  Senate  on  the  trial  of  Mr. 
Chase's  impeachment.  This  bill  had  passed  in  the  House  of 
Representatives  some  days  before,  and  made  an  appropria- 
tion of  five  thousand  dollars  to  pay  the  witnesses  summoned 
on  the  part  of  the  chairman  of  the  prosecution,  and  to  defray 
any  other  expenses  which  had  been  incurred  on  the  trial,  and 
which  should  be  certified  by  the  chairman  of  the  managers. 
On  the  second  reading  of  the  bill  in  Senate,  the  day  before 
the  sentence  passed,  amendments  were  moved  to  double 
the  amount  of  the  appropriation,  to  provide  for  the  payment 
of  expenses  incurred  on  the  occasion  by  order  of  the  Vice 
President,  certified  by  him,  and  to  extend  the  payment  of  the 
witnesses  to  all  those  who  had  been  summoned  and  attended 
on  the  part  of  the  respondent  as  well  as  the  others.  The 
question  on  these  amendments  was  by  general  consent  post- 
poned until  after  the  decision  upon  the  trial,  it  being  observed 
that  its  aspect  would  be  materially  different  according  as  the 
issue  should  be  for  conviction  or  for  acquittal.  This  event 
having  taken  place,  the  amendments  were  unanimously 
adopted  in  Senate,  but  on  being  sent  to  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives were  disagreed  to  by  them.  Each  house  insisted 
in  the  usual  form.  A  conference  was  had  without  producing 
any  agreement;  each  house  adhered  to  its  own  purpose  and 
the  bill  was  lost.  Nor  is  it  an  inconsiderable  fact  that  the 
last  act  of  the  Senate  upon  this  bill,  that  of  adhering,  was 
without  a  dissenting  voice.  This  question  will  probably 
be  renewed  at  the  next  session  of  Congress,  for  by  the  failure 
of  the  Bill  no  provision  is  made  for  paying  any  of  the  wit- 
nesses, and  they  certainly  all  have  a  just  claim  to  some  in- 
demnity for  their  time  and  attendance  given  at  the  regular 
summons  of  the  Senate.  The  question  whether  the  United 
States  shall  pay  the  witnesses  on  both  sides  in  cases  of  im- 
peachment is  in  many  points  of  view  important  as  a  general 


i8o5]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  121 

question.  It  was  not  fully  discussed  in  either  house  on  this 
bill,  and  reason  and  precedent  may  be  produced  in  support 
of  both  its  sides.  There  were,  however,  in  this  instance  cir- 
cumstances peculiarly  tending  to  influence  the  Senate  in 
first  adopting  and  finally  adhering  to  the  principle  of  indis- 
criminate payment.  The  acquittal  of  the  person  accused 
was  one.  But  there  was  another  which  might  have  yet 
greater  weight.  All  the  witnesses  had  been  summoned  by 
a  subpoena,  the  form  of  which  was  reported  by  a  Committee 
of  which  Mr.  Giles  was  chairman.  This  form  commanded 
the  attendance  of  the  witness,  without  any  indication  at  the 
suggestion  of  which  party  it  had  issued.  None  of  the  wit- 
nesses, therefore,  could  know  whether  they  were  summoned 
on  behalf  of  the  United  States  or  of  the  respondent;  their 
obedience  was  in  all  cases  the  same  to  the  order  of  the  Senate, 
and  it  seemed  obvious  that  their  claim  for  indemnity  from 
the  government  stood  on  the  same  foundation.  Mr.  Giles 
very  explicitly  declared  himself  in  favor  of  the  principle 
and  gave  it  as  his  unequivocal  opinion  that  it  should  in 
point  of  justice  and  policy  be  extended  to  all  cases  of  im- 
peachment, whether  the  sentence  should  be  for  acquittal  or 
for  conviction. 

The  fate  of  this  bill  was  succeeded  by  an  attempt  in  the 
House  of  Representatives  to  provide  by  their  single  act  a 
substitute  for  it.  A  resolution  was  offered  directing  the 
payment  of  the  witnesses  summoned  on  their  part  from  the 
contingent  fund  of  the  House,  and  this  resolution  prescribed 
the  sum  which  should  be  allowed  to  each  witness  for  his 
travel  and  attendance.  It  would  inevitably  have  been  car- 
ried, but  that  the  number  of  members  then  remaining,  dis- 
posed to  rush  into  such  extremes,  was  not  sufficient  of  itself 
to  form  a  quorum.  And  the  members  opposed  to  the  meas- 
ure, whenever  it  was  called  up,  withdrew  from  the  House. 


122  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1805 

Let  it  be  remembered  that  this  effort  to  extend  the  "unde- 
fined field  of  contingencies'1  was  made  by  those  who  have 
been  most  clamorous  for  the  extremest  detail  of  specific 
appropriation. 

It  was  in  this  situation,  with  the  two  houses  of  Congress 
in  positions  of  direct  opposition  against  each  other,  with  the 
House  of  Representatives  aiming  with  huge  two  handed 
sway,  at  the  same  moment  a  cut  at  the  supreme  judiciary 
and  a  thrust  at  the  Senate;  with  the  same  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives floating  between  anarchy  and  discord  at  one 
moment,  unable  to  make  a  quorum,  and  at  the  next  unable  to 
keep  it  for  the  purpose  of  acting  with  a  majority  attempting 
with  blushless  face  a  flagrant  violation  of  the  Constitution, 
and  a  minority  defeating  their  purpose  by  repeated  secessions 
in  a  mass,  with  some  important  bills  at  the  point  of  falling 
through,  though  passed  by  both  branches,  because  the 
Speaker  could  not  sign  them  without  a  quorum  present  —  in 
this  situation  it  was,  that  at  half  past  nine  in  the  evening  of 
Sunday  the  3rd  of  March,  the  eighth  Congress  of  the  United 
States  terminated  its  existence,  and  I  have  been  induced 
by  two  motives  to  give  you  the  detail  contained  in  this  and 
my  last  letter.  The  one,  because  the  transactions  which  I 
have  related  may  be  the  precursors  of  events  more  highly 
momentous,  and  as  such  deserve  peculiarly  to  be  noted  down; 
and  the  other,  because  I  was  desirous  to  make  you  some  re- 
turn for  the  excellent  letters  I  have  received  from  you  in  the 
course  of  the  winter,  and  which  my  engagements  at  the  time 
compelled  me  to  leave  unanswered.  I  thought  the  narrative 
might  afford  you  some  amusement,  and  knew  it  would  fur- 
nish you  a  fund  for  useful  reflections,  of  which  I  indulge  the 
hope  of  sharing  in  the  benefit.  .  .  . 


i8o5]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  123 

TO  SAMUEL  DEXTER  l 

QUINCY,  6  August,  1805. 
SIR: 

Being  highly  sensible  of  the  honor  done  me  by  the  govern- 
ment of  the  University,  in  appointing  me  to  the  professor- 
ship of  rhetoric  and  oratory,  founded  by  Mr.  N.  Boylston, 
and  believing  that  the  objects  of  that  institution  are  of  much 
importance  to  the  reputation  and  honor  of  our  country,  I 
have  felt  a  warm  and  anxious  desire  to  justify  as  far  as  I  am 
able  the  confidence  thus  reposed  in  me,  and  to  undertake 
the  discharge  of  functions,  for  which,  however  deficient  in  all 
other  respects,  I  was  conscious  of  a  zealous  and  affectionate 
attachment.  In  considering  attentively  however  the  rules, 
directions  and  statutes  under  which  this  professorship  is 
placed,  I  find  them  such  as  it  would  be  worse  than  presump- 
tion for  me  to  pledge  myself  to,  since  I  could  not  form  the 
engagement  without  knowing  my  incompetency  to  perform 
its  promise. 

The  duties  assigned  to  the  professor  would  require  his 
constant,  unremitting  attendance  at  the  college,  in  term 
time,  during  the  whole  year.  Avocations  from  which  I  do 
not  feel  myself  authorized  or  inclined  to  seek  a  dispensation 
call  me  to  a  distant  part  of  the  country  during  half  the  year. 
These  indeed  may  be  temporary,  and  cease  in  the  course  of  a 
few  years,  but  in  such  case  they  will  be  followed  by  others 
which  would  render  a  constant  residence  or  attendance  at 
Cambridge  through  the  year  alike  impracticable  for  me. 

It  was  suggested  by  some  gentlemen  of  the  committee, 
that  perhaps  such  a  modification  of  the  statutes  might  be 

1  Chairman  of  the  Committee  of  the  Corporation  and  Overseers  of  Harvard  Uni- 
versity. 


i24  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1805 

adopted  as  would  render  my  performance  of  the  duties  com- 
patible with  a  residence  in  the  neighborhood  of  Cambridge, 
and  with  occasional  absence  on  necessary  attendance  to  other 
employments;  and  as  the  committee  appeared  desirous  that 
I  should  specify  what  part  of  the  duties  prescribed  by  the 
rules  I  could  positively  undertake,  I  have  no  hesitation  in 
complying  with  their  request. 

The  course  of  public  lectures  to  the  two  Senior  classes 
and  resident  graduates  is  by  the  statutes  to  be  given  in 
weekly  lectures.  This  of  course  contemplates  a  series  of 
about  forty  lectures.  The  objects  to  which  the  attention  of 
the  lecturer  is  directed  by  the  regulations  could  not,  indeed, 
be  properly  treated  in  the  compass  of  a  smaller  number.  In- 
stead of  reading  this  course  by  one  weekly  lecture,  I  should 
readily  engage  to  accomplish  the  same  object  by  two  lectures 
a  week,  during  that  part  of  the  year  when  I  could  give  my 
attendance.  But  as  the  first  composition  of  the  course  must 
obviously  be  a  work  of  much  labor,  and  require  a  very  at- 
tentive perusal  of  numerous  writers  in  various  languages, 
some  of  which  are  not  altogether  familiar  to  me,  I  should 
expect  to  be  allowed  two  years  in  the  first  instance  for  the 
completion  of  the  course.  Thus  in  the  course  of  the  next 
summer,  I  should  hold  myself  engaged  to  go  through  half 
the  course  with  the  hope  of  finishing  the  remainder  the 
succeeding  year,  after  which  I  should  be  content  to  go 
through  the  whole  course  every  year  by  two  lectures  in  the 
week  in  the  summer  terms. 

The  next  object  in  the  regulations  which  appears  more 
peculiarly  to  belong  to  this  branch  of  instruction  is  that 
which  relates  to  the  elocution  of  the  students.  And  if  the 
other  arrangements  of  the  college  exercises  could  be  so 
adapted,  that  the  public  declamations  of  the  two  Senior 
classes  should  be  fixed  on  the  same  days  when  I  should 


i8oS]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  125 

attend  to  give  the  public  lectures,  I  would  readily  devote  the 
day  to  the  purpose  of  presiding  at  them.  I  should  also  give 
the  necessary  attendance  to  hear  in  private  the  performances 
previous  to  the  annual  commencement,  and  when  practic- 
able, previous  to  the  exhibitions.  Further  than  this  will 
certainly  not  be  in  my  power,  and  even  to  the  performance 
of  this,  I  am  deeply  conscious  of  needing  a  full  share  of  the 
customary  indulgence  experienced  by  other  instructors. 

There  is  another  part  of  the  statutes  which  I  feel  myself 
under  an  indispensable  obligation  to  request  may  be  revised. 
It  is  that  part  of  the  third  article  which  imposes  upon  the 
professor  a  religious  test,  to  be  applied  publicly  on  the  day  of 
his  inauguration.  The  Constitution  of  the  Commonwealth 
has  made  a  general  declaration  of  belief  in  the  Christian 
religion  sufficient  for  admission  to  the  highest  offices  of  the 
State,  and  in  the  opinion  of  many  wise,  virtuous  and  pious 
citizens  even  that  requisition  is  too  much.  With  the  most 
perfect  deference  and  respect  for  the  legislature  of  the  college, 
I  must  question  their  authority  to  require  my  subscription  to 
a  creed  not  recognized  by  the  Constitution  or  laws  of  the 
State;  nor  do  I  perceive  in  a  professorship  of  rhetoric  and 
oratory  anything  which  peculiarly  calls  for  so  minute  a 
scrutiny  into  the  details  of  the  professor's  religious  opinions 
as  is  here  proposed.  I  beg  to  be  understood  that  this  objec- 
tion has  reference  more  to  the  interest  of  the  institution  it- 
self, than  personally  to  me.  It  is  to  the  test  itself,  and  not 
to  the  doctrines  which  it  prescribes.  These  I  wish  to  leave 
undisturbed  by  any  controversy;  reserving  my  confession  of 
faith  for  my  Maker,  and  desirous  of  seeing  my  fellow  crea- 
tures enjoy  the  same  indulgence. 

I  cannot  conclude  without  expressing  my  wish,  sir,  that 
in  their  deliberations  upon  this  occasion,  the  Corporation 
and  Overseers  would  altogether  discard  every  consideration 


126  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1805 

of  personal  accommodation  to  me;  that  the  interests  and  the 
feelings  of  the  man  may  be  altogether  excluded,  and  the  in- 
terests of  the  University  alone  consulted;  assuring  you  and 
them  that  if,  in  their  opinion,  the  welfare  of  the  students  will 
be  promoted  by  the  election  of  a  person  so  situated  as  to 
have  the  performance  of  all  the  duties  assigned  by  the  stat- 
utes in  his  power,  I  shall  most  cheerfully  acquiesce  in  the 
decision.  In  that  case,  they  will  consider  this  letter  as  declin- 
ing the  acceptance  of  the  office,  with  the  offer  of  which  they 
have  honored  me,  and  proceed  when  they  shall  think  proper 
to  the  choice  of  another  person. 
I  am,  &c. 

TO  THE  CORPORATION  OF  HARVARD  COLLEGE 

QUINCY,  II  October,  1805. 
GENTLEMEN: 

A  vote  of  the  Corporation,  dated  2  September,  has  been 
communicated  to  me  by  the  Honorable  Judge  Davis,  which 
vote  having  passed  on  consideration  of  my  letter  to  the 
chairman  of  the  committee  of  the  Corporation  and  Overseers 
of  7  [6]  August  last,  I  am  requested  to  state  in  writing  my 
observations  upon  it. 

The  declaration  proposed  to  be  substituted  instead  of  that 
originally  required  by  the  third  article  of  the  rules  and  regula- 
tions, is  such  as  I  can  have  no  objection  to  making. 

But  the  proviso  "that  suitable  provision  be  made  for  the 
performance  by  some  competent  substitute  of  the  duties 
which  may  not  be  required  to  be  performed  by  the  professor 
of  rhetoric  and  oratory,  personally;  said  substitute  to  be  ap- 
pointed by  the  Corporation  and  Overseers,  and  his  title  9 
powers  and  duties  to  be  by  them  designated,"  is  liable  to  some 
difficulties. 


i8oS]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  127 

In  its  most  obvious  construction  it  proposes  a  deputy 
totally  independent  of  and  beyond  the  control  of  his  prin- 
cipal. And  if  this  was  not  the  real  intention  of  the  vote  its 
inevitable  operation  must  be  such;  since  upon  points  of  in- 
struction, relative  to  an  object  so  dependent  upon  taste  as 
elocution,  the  exercise  of  any  control  over  the  principles  or 
practice  of  an  instructor  would  in  my  mind  be  inconsistent 
with  the  delicacy  of  deportment  due  from  one  gentleman  to 
another,  even  if  the  power  of  such  control  were  absolutely 
given. 

It  would,  therefore,  be  substantially  a  separate  and  dis- 
tinct establishment,  yet  so  connected  with  the  professorship 
as  might  lead  to  unpleasant  differences  between  the  two 
teachers,  and  become  a  source  of  embarrassment  and  per- 
plexity, if  not  of  contempt,  to  the  students. 

I  would  respectfully  submit  also  to  the  consideration  of 
the  Corporation,  how  far  the  establishment  of  a  substitute 
would  be  consistent  with  the  manifest  intention  of  the  Boyl- 
ston  foundation  itself.  By  that  foundation  the  subject  of 
rhetoric  and  oratory  is  supposed  to  be  properly  within  the 
department  of  one  person;  and  although  it  could  not  be  the 
wish  of  the  founder  to  tie  the  hands  of  the  college  govern- 
ment from  the  establishment  of  any  other  similar  institution, 
yet  is  it  imaginable  that  he  would  have  devoted  a  part  of  his 
estate  to  this  object,  had  he  foreseen  that  it  would  be  divided 
into  a  double  foundation,  or  provided  for  by  other  means? 
If  a  part  of  the  professor's  defined  duties  may  be  substituted 
off  upon  a  vicar,  why  may  not  the  whole  be  disposed  of  in 
the  same  manner?  If  the  principle  of  substitution  may  be 
grafted  upon  a  branch  of  the  professorship,  what  should 
hinder  its  being  made  in  future  to  cover  the  whole  stock? 
A  progress  of  things  in  such  a  course  as  this  is  not  with- 
out example;  but  its  ultimate  issue  has  ever  been  a  total 


128  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1805 

perversion  of  the  appropriation  from  its  intended  desti- 
nation. 

In  one  particular  these  remarks  have  a  bearing  upon  my 
personal  concern,  which  will  I  hope  serve  as  my  justification 
for  making  them.  In  undertaking  the  duties  of  this  office  I 
should  consider  myself  bound  by  all  the  means  in  my  com- 
petency to  fulfil  the  intentions  of  the  founder.  But  such  is 
the  minuteness  of  the  rules  and  regulations  prescribed,  that 
nothing  is  left  to  the  discretion  or  to  the  judgment  of  the 
professor.  Perhaps  the  modes  of  instruction  pointed  out  in 
these  rules  may  be  the  best  that  could  be  devised.  The  sub- 
ject being  entirely  new  to  me  I  certainly  have  nothing  to 
propose  which  might  be  better  adapted  to  the  purpose. 
Something  may  possibly  be  suggested  by  experience,  and  by 
the  reflections  which  a  course  of  time  devoted  to  the  institu- 
tion may  occasion.  In  such  a  contingency  I  should  rely  upon 
a  disposition  on  the  part  of  the  college  government  to  weigh 
with  candor  and  indulgence  any  proposals  for  variations  in 
the  exercises,  to  facilitate  the  instruction  of  the  students  in 
this  part  of  their  education.  But  if  any  such  measures  should 
require  consideration,  shackled  with  the  existence  of  another 
officer  charged  with  a  part  of  the  professor's  duties,  I  appre- 
hend the  chances  of  improvement  in  the  system  would  be 
very  much  impaired. 

I  very  sincerely  lament  the  trouble  which  you  gentlemen 
have  had  on  this  occasion,  and  as  it  may  possibly  prevent 
further  embarrassments  of  the  same  kind,  if  I  give  you  ex- 
plicitly my  ideas  upon  the  subject,  I  will  observe  that  the 
original  rules  and  regulations  formed  a  system  of  instruction 
on  this  foundation  which  it  would  be  impossible  for  me  to 
carry  into  effect.  I  was  requested  to  state  in  writing  what 
part  of  that  system  I  could  engage  to  accomplish,  and  in 
consequence  wrote  my  former  letter  to  the  chairman  of  your 


i8oS]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  129 

committee.  But  it  was  never  my  wish  or  idea  to  obtain  a 
personal  accommodation  to  myself  by  a  permission  to  have 
a  substitute  assigned  me  to  perform  part  of  my  duties.  The 
duties  of  the  office  if  I  hold  it  must  be  discharged  by  myself. 
Were  they  such  as  to  leave  me  any  exercise  of  my  own  judg- 
ment in  respect  to  the  modes  of  instruction  I  should  be  happy 
to  undertake  them.  Were  they  all  prescribed  to  me,  but  of 
a  nature  to  require  only  the  portion  of  time  which  I  can  apply 
to  this  occupation,  I  should  cheerfully  assume  them;  being 
as  they  are,  requiring  a  daily  and  unintermitted  attendance 
in  term  time  the  whole  year  round,  I  would  still  from  my 
zeal  for  the  interests  of  the  University,  and  particularly  for 
the  objects  of  foundation,  engage  to  perform  them,  were  I 
not  certain  it  would  be  pledging  myself  to  what  I  cannot 
accomplish.  A  modification  cf  the  duties  themselves,  not 
of  the  manner  in  which  they  are  to  be  executed,  is  what  I 
have  to  request,  if  it  be  deemed  perfectly  consistent  with  the 
views  of  the  founder,  and  with  the  honor  of  the  college  and 
its  government. 
I  am,  &c. 

TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

WASHINGTON,  6  December,  1805. 

DEAR  SIR: 

I  inclosed  under  a  blank  cover  to  you  a  copy  of  the  Presi- 
dent's message  on  the  day  when  it  was  delivered,  and  having 
now  to  inclose  a  letter  from  my  wife  to  my  mother,  and  a 
bill  which  has  already  passed  both  Houses  of  Congress,  I 
cannot  forbear  writing  a  line  with  it  to  recall  myself  to  your 
kind  remembrance. 

You  will  perceive  tnat  the  message  is  in  a  style  and  tone 
which  have  not  been  fashionable  of  late  years.  It  is  probable 


130  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1805 

the  representatives  of  the  people  will  not  readily  pledge 
themselves  to  the  responsibility  of  all  measures  of  energy 
which  it  recommends.  The  dispositions  of  the  representa- 
tives towards  each  other,  as  far  as  can  yet  be  observed,  is  less 
acrimonious  than  for  some  years  past.  But  no  occasion  has 
yet  occurred  to  call  forth  manifestations  of  temper. 

The  inclosed  bill  covers  only  a  part  of  the  deficiency  in  the 
naval  appropriation  for  the  current  year.  Its  whole  amount 
is  of  600,000  dollars.  The  bill  passed  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives on  a  bare  statement  that  the  deficiency  existed 
and  without  a  question  asked.  In  Senate  on  a  motion  of 
Mr.  Tracy  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  was  called  on  for  the 
reasons  of  this  deficiency,  and  he  has  made  a  report  which 
you  will  see  when  printed.  To  meet  some  of  the  expenses 
which  have  so  far  outrun  the  prior  provisions  and  which 
pressed  for  payment  before  Congress  met,  the  system 
of  specific  appropriation  has  been  freely  trampled  under 
feet. 

I  this  day  occasionally  met  and  instantly  recognized  our 
old  friend  Captain  Landais,  whom  I  had  not  seen  for  upwards 
of  twenty  years.  But  I  had  some  difficulty  to  brush  up  his 
remembrance  of  me.  When  brought  fully  to  his  recollection 
he  was  very  particular  in  his  inquiries  after  you,  whom  he 
tells  me  he  saw  not  many  years  since.1 

1  December  8,  "Captain  Landais,  an  old  acquaintance  whom  I  had  not  seen  for 
upwards  of  twenty  years,  called  upon  me  this  morning,  and  sat  with  me  a  couple  of 
hours,  which  prevented  me  from  going  out.  I  had  recognized  him  two  days  since 
walking  in  one  of  the  entrance  rooms  at  the  Capitol,  and  accosted  him  by  name. 
He  did  not  then  immediately  know  me;  but  on  my  explaining  to  him  who  I  was, 
remembered  me.  My  acquaintance  with  him  was  in  the  spring  and  summer  of  the 
year  1779,  at  Brest,  Nantes  and  1'Orient,  on  board  the  frigate  Alliance  which  he 
then  commanded,  and  on  board  of  which  I  was  to  have  returned  with  my  father  to 
this  country.  But  the  destination  of  the  Alliance  was  changed,  and  we  came  home 
in  the  French  frigate  la  Sensible.  Captain  Landais  this  morning  gave  me  a  history 
of  his  life  since  that  time,  which  has  been  various  and  full  of  adventure.  He  is  now 


i8o6l  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  131 

Love  to  my  dear  children,  duty  and  affection  to  my 
mother,  and  kind  regards  to  all  the  family,  with  which  I  am 
ever  yours. 

TO  RICHARD  RUSH 

WASHINGTON,  12  December,  1805. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

I  have  just  received  your  favor  of  the  8th  instant,  and 
can  only  assure  you  that  I  have  no  reason  to  suppose  there  is 
the  smallest  foundation  for  the  report  to  which  you  allude, 
but  on  the  contrary  that  I  have  good  reason  for  believing  it 
altogether  groundless.  That  any  such  mission  is  contem- 
plated by  the  government  appears  to  me  not  very  probable, 
but  if  it  is,  the  person  selected  for  it  will  be  different. 

Your  desire  of  visiting  Europe  is  very  natural,  and  is  dic- 
tated by  views  so  honorable  that  I  hope  you  will  find  some 
real  occasion  by  which  it  may  be  gratified. 

I  shall  according  to  your  request  consider  your  letter  as 
altogether  confidential,  and  beg  leave  to  be  persuaded  that 
in  anything  within  my  power  I  shall  ever  be  happy  to  prove 
to  you  the  sincerity  of  the  esteem  and  friendship  with  which 
I  am,  &C.1 

TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

WASHINGTON,  14  January,  1806. 
.  ...... 

Your  ploughing  in  December  is  an  occupation  which  I 
need  not  say  to  you  is  much  more  agreeable  than  laboring 

here  with  a  claim  upon  Congress  for  his  share  of  certain  prizes  captured  by  him  dur- 
ing the  American  War."    Ms.  Diary. 

1  Rush  asked  to  be  appointed  secretary  of  legation  under  Adams,  whose  name  was 
mentioned  in  connection  with  the  London  mission.  The  rumor  reached  Monroe, 
then  in  London.  Writings  of  Monroe,  IV.  398. 


I32  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1806 

at  the  political  plough.  The  season  here  has  been  in  all  re- 
spects uncommonly  mild  until  within  these  few  days,  and 
the  world  of  parties  and  legislation  as  moderate  as  the  tem- 
perature of  the  atmosphere.  But  as  the  new  year  advances 
the  weather  grows  cold,  and  we  grow  warm.  We  are  very 
much  perplexed  what  we  shall  do  to  manifest  our  valor  with- 
out hazarding  our  persons,  and  after  spending  a  long  session 
in  discussing  the  subject,  we  shall  in  all  probability  finish 
without  doing  anything  of  importance.  At  least  I  have  al- 
ready seen  enough  to  convince  me  that  we  shall  do  nothing 
good.  For  the  protection  of  our  territory  or  of  our  commerce 
we  shall  do  nothing;  but  we  may  very  possibly  prepare  for 
the  abandonment  of  the  first,  and  contribute  our  share  to 
the  sacrifices  of  the  last.  We  shall  perhaps  enter  into  the 
unprofitable  contest  with  Great  Britain  which  can  do  the 
most  harm,  not  to  the  other,  but  to  ourselves.  In  this  emu- 
lation of  mischief  I  am  far  from  being  certain  but  that  we 
shall  bear  the  palm. 

Reports  are  in  circulation  that  all  our  differences  with 
Spain  are  already  settled  entirely  to  our  advantage,  but  if  not 
we  shall  try  again  to  trade  with  her  for  land.  We  shall  per- 
haps offer  her  almost  all  our  province  of  Louisiana  for  the 
Floridas,  or,  if  she  likes  it  better,  more  money;  fighting  her 
we  have  almost  done  even  talking  of. 

Captain  Landais  particularly  desires  me  to  present  his 
respects  to  you.  I  have  sent  you  the  report  of  the  Secretary 
of  State  on  his  petition  or  memorial.  The  papers  are  cu- 
rious, and  Count  BernstorfFs  letter  in  answer  to  the  applica- 
tion of  Dr.  Franklin  is  amusing,  as  it  shows  the  old  gentle- 
man's embarrassment  between  the  alternate  pressure  of 
England  on  one  side,  and  France  on  the  other.  He  appears 
to  have  understood  that  his  most  effectual  means  of  ex- 
tricating himself  was  to  drown  his  outrage  against  the 


i8o6]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  133 

United  States  in  a  flood  of  personal  adulation  to  their 
minister.1 

Our  Tunisian  and  Indian  visitors  are  still  the  principal 
objects  of  curiosity  we  have  to  entertain  us.  Many  of  the 
Indians  who  were  here  are  gone,  but  others  have  come  to  take 
their  places  without  any  invitation,  and  they  are  so  numer- 
ous as  to  occasion  some  uneasiness  among  the  inhabitants 
of  this  neighborhood.  They  are  sometimes  troublesome  by 
introducing  themselves  unexpectedly  to  private  houses,  and 
their  habits  of  intemperance  sometimes  make  them  uncom- 
fortable companions. 

Mr.  Giles  and  Mr.  Bayard  have  not  yet  taken  their  seats 
this  session.  I  suppose  they  will  arrive  nearly  together. 
Their  absence  leaves  both  sides  of  the  House  in  a  manner 
without  leaders,  and  a  great  degree  of  unsteadiness  and  lan- 
guor hangs  over  our  proceedings  in  consequence  of  this  cir- 
cumstance. We  find  great  reason  to  regret  the  loss  of  our 
late  President.2 


I  remain,  &c. 


RESOLUTIONS  3 


[February,  1806.] 

Resolved,  That  the   Capture  and   Condemnation  of  American 
Vessels  and  their  Cargoes  under  the  orders  of  the  British  Govern- 

1  Andres  Peder,  Count  Bernstorff  (1735-1797),  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  in 
Denmark  (1772-1780).    The  letters  are  in  Writings  of  Franklin  (Smyth),  VII.  420. 
The  report  on  Landais  is  in  American  State  Papers,  Foreign  Relations,  II.  773. 

2  Aaron  Burr. 

3  These  resolutions,  "reported  by  a  committee  of  which  I  was  a  member,  and 
drawn  up  by  me,"  are  among  the  Adams  Mss.  They  were  considered  by  the  Senate, 
February  12,  13,  14,  1806.    The  first  was  adopted  unanimously;  the  second,  after  a 
debate  of  two  days,  by  a  vote  of  twenty-three  to  seven,  the  words  and  insist  upon 


i34  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1806 

merit  on  the  pretext  of  their  being  engaged  in  a  trade  with  the 
Enemies  of  Great  Britain  not  permitted  before  the  war  is  an  unpro- 
voked aggression  upon  the  property  of  the  citizens  of  these  United 
States  a  wanton  violation  of  their  neutral  rights  and  a  direct  en- 
croachment upon  their  national  Independence. 

Resolved,  That  the  President  of  the  United  States  be  requested 
to  instruct  the  Minister  of  the  United  States  at  the  Court  of  Great 
Britain  to  demand  and  insist  upon  the  immediate  restoration  of 
the  property  of  the  Citizens  of  the  United  States  which  has  been 
or  may  be  captured  and  condemned  on  the  said  pretext  and  upon 
their  indemnification  for  their  losses  and  damages  sustained  by 
such  arbitrary  seizures  and  unjust  condemnations. 

Resolved,  That  it  is  expedient  by  Law  to  suspend  the  power  of 
transfer  upon  all  Certificates  in  the  funds  or  Bank  Stock  of  the 
United  States  held  by  subjects  of  the  king  of  Great  Britain  until 
the  British  Government  shall  have  given  satisfaction  to  the  United 
States  on  the  subject  of  the  said  captures  and  condemnations  and 
no  longer.  And  that  the  Committee  be  directed  to  bring  in  a  bill 
for  that  purpose. 

TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

WASHINGTON,  n  February,  1806. 

Since  the  date  of  your  favor  of  the  29th  ultimo  you  have 
doubtless  received  many  additional  documents,  confirming 
your  opinion  of  the  system  of  policy  prevalent  here  in  rela- 
tion to  our  foreign  affairs.  Unqualified  submission  to  France 
and  unqualified  defiance  of  Great  Britain  are  indeed  the  two 
pillars  upon  which  our  measures  are  to  rest,  and  numerous 
as  the  proofs  are  which  you  will  have  of  these  facts,  you  have 
probably  still  no  conception  of  the  extremes  to  which  it  has 
already  been  carried.  The  prohibition  of  the  trade  to  St. 

being  stricken  out  by  a  vote  of  sixteen  to  fifteen;  and  the  third,  "belonging  to  Gen- 
eral Smith  and  Mr.  Anderson"  was  not  adopted.  See  Adams,  Memoirs. 


i8o63  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  135 

Domingo  is  now  upon  its  last  stage  in  Senate,  and  in  all 
probability  before  I  close  this  letter  will  be  passed.1  But 
this  is  nothing,  comparatively  speaking.  The  general  tend- 
ency of  opinions  and  passions  which  govern  our  adminis- 
tration has  always  been  such  that  this  course  might  have 
been  expected  from  the  commencement  of  our  session;  but 
all  the  events  which  have  recently  occurred  in  Europe,  and 
the  knowledge  of  which  has  come  to  us  since  our  meeting, 
have  very  powerfully  contributed  to  confirm  this  course  of 
measures.  Our  people  have  indeed  an  enthusiastic  opinion 
of  the  power  of  France,  and  if  there  could  before  have  re- 
mained any  doubt  of  the  foundation  upon  which  that  opinion 
stands,  what  can  be  replied  to  the  proofs  of  Bonaparte's 
armies  in  Vienna,  and  the  whole  Austrian  Empire  sinking 
before  them  almost  without  a  struggle  of  resistance.  The 
continent  of  Europe,  it  cannot  be  questioned,  is  not  only 
prostrate  at  the  feet  of  France,  but  to  all  appearance  irre- 
trievably subdued.  How  long  the  insular  situation  of  Great 
Britain  and  her  naval  force  will  enable  her  to  bear  up  against 
this  universal  suppression,  is  not  easy  to  say;  but  that  she 
too  must  sink  sooner  or  later  under  such  a  mass  and  impetus 
of  force  can  hardly  be  questioned. 

I  know  not  to  what  extent  France  will  avail  herself  of  the 
situation  in  which  she  stands  to  dictate  humiliation  or  sub- 
mission to  us;  but  this  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt,  that  what- 
soever she  shall  please  to  command  we  shall  comply  with. 

There  is  only  one  doubt  yet  remaining  upon  my  mind  as 
to  the  ruling  principle  of  our  foreign  policy,  and  that  is, 
whether  in  the  terrors  we  are  assuming  against  Great  Britain 
there  is  not  as  much  or  more  of  vapor  than  of  substance. 
There  are  some  indications  which  might  lead  to  the  conclu- 

1  Adams,  Memoirs,  January  15,  et  seq.  He  had  made  a  speech  on  the  measure, 
December  20,  1805.  Annals  of  Congress,  Qth  Cong.,  1st.  Sess.,  29. 


136  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1806 

sion,  that  when  we  come  to  the  critical  moment  we  shall  not 
be  so  terrible  as  we  now  threaten.  The  tables  of  both  Houses 
are  loaded  with  motion  upon  motion  for  non-intercourse,  for 
non-importation,  for  navigation  acts,  for  retaliation  and  re- 
prisal, for  confiscation  of  debts,  and  for  everything  that  can 
exhibit  temper  against  the  British;  but  to  all  this  there  is 
besides  the  opposition  which  it  will  meet  from  reasonable 
quarters,  a  vast  body  of  opposition  lurking  among  the  friends 
of  the  administration  itself.  All  the  quakerish  members  of 
both  Houses  are  averse  to  anything  that  looks  even  by  a 
squint  towards  energy.  Being  for  peace  all  the  world  over, 
they  begin  to  discover  that  these  measures  may  give  offence 
to  Great  Britain,  and  they  think  the  only  course  to  be  pur- 
sued is  negotiation.  Besides  this  the  members  for  the 
Southern  states  discover  reluctance  to  agree  upon  anything 
which  may  obstruct  the  freedom  of  their  trade  in  foreign 
ships,  or  affect  the  exportation  of  their  cotton.  It  is  obvious 
that  great  efforts  are  making  to  stimulate  the  passions  of  the 
people,  and  to  lash  into  fermentation  the  blood  of  their 
representatives;  but  it  is  not  yet  equally  clear  that  this  plan 
will  be  so  far  successful  as  to  show  itself  in  the  form  of  law. 

By  one  of  the  documents  inclosed  you  will  perceive  that 
Mr.  J.  Randolph  has  renewed  his  motion  for  an  amendment 
to  the  Constitution  making  the  judges  removable  upon  the 
address  of  the  two  Houses.  It  is  probable  that  this  will  pass 
by  a  competent  proportion  of  votes  in  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives. What  will  be  its  fate  in  Senate  I  am  unable  to 
foresee.1 

The  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  is  now  in  session. 
All  the  judges  are  here  excepting  Mr.  Chase,  who  is  very  ill  at 
Baltimore.  Judge  Cushing  is  also  unwell,  and  has  hitherto 

1  Annals  of  Congress,  9th  Cong.,  1st.  Sess.,  500.    No  action  on  the  resolution  was 
taken. 


i8o6]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  137 

not  been  able  to  take  his  seat.  The  Court  dki  not  sit  until 
Saturday,  a  competent  number  of  the  judges  not  having 
arrived  until  then.  I  am  so  confined  by  my  attendance  in 
Senate  and  upon  the  business  transacting  in  Senate  that  I 
shall  not  be  able  to  attend  the  Court  as  I  should  wish. 

The  pressure  of  business  has  also  forcibly  driven  my  clas- 
sical studies  from  my  head.  I  do  indeed  still  appropriate 
about  an  hour  a  day  to  that  object,  but  it  is  little  better 
than  a  lost  hour;  the  studies  of  a  scholar  require  a  mind  at 
ease,  a  vacant  mind,  or  at  least  a  mind  not  engrossed  by 
other  objects.  But  when  the  questions  of  public  import 
and  measures  of  national  deliberation  take  hold  of  my  mind, 
and  have  warmly  engaged  me  nine  or  ten  hours  in  the  day,  I 
lose  entirely  the  power  of  abstraction  and  the  means  of 
studying  the  poetry,  history,  or  languages  of  antiquity.  A 
similar  cause  will  I  hope  excuse  any  incoherence  which  you 
may  frequently  perceive  in  my  letters  to  you  and  my  other 
friends  from  this  place.  I  am  obliged  to  write  in  the  midst  of 
debates  to  which  I  cannot  avoid  giving  more  or  less  of  atten- 
tion at  the  very  time  I  am  writing.  At  this  moment,  for  in- 
stance, Dr.  Mitchill  is  giving  us  a  dissertation  upon  salt- 
petre, and  telling  us  of  all  the  rocks,  dens,  caves,  fens  and 
mountain  sides,  where  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  United  States, 
on  a  bill  to  prohibit  the  exportation  of  arms  and  ammunition. 
The  St.  Domingo  trade  bill  has  been  re-committed  to  a  select 
committee  for  amendment. 

•  •••••• 

I  remain,  &C.1 

1  On  February  13,  1806,  Adams  introduced  a  bill  "to  prevent  the  abuse  of  the 
privileges  and  immunities  enjoyed  by  foreign  ministers  within  the  United  States." 
It  is  printed  in  Annals  of  Congress,  9th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  92.  The  bill  was  reported 
with  amendments,  February  20,  and  Adams  delivered  a  speech  in  its  favor  March  3, 
which  is  also  printed.  (/&.,  145.)  The  measure  was  rejected  March  7.  "I  have  read 
your  bill.  What  the  corps  diplomatique  will  think  of  it  I  know  not.  It  is  a  danger- 


138  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1806 

TO  WILLIAM  STEPHENS  SMITH 

WASHINGTON,  26  March,  1806. 
DEAR  SIR: 

I  received  last  evening  your  favor  of  the  23  rd.  The  ap- 
pointment of  Mr.  Schenck  had  been  two  or  three  days  before 
confirmed  by  the  Senate.  I  most  sincerely  lament  your  re- 
moval from  the  office  of  Surveyor,  but  this  act  is  exclusively 
within  the  power  of  the  President,  and  the  only  notice  he 
usually  gives  to  the  Senate  of  a  removal  is  by  a  new  nomina- 
tion to  the  office.  Such  was  the  case  in  the  present  instance. 
The  first  intimation  I  had  of  your  being  suspended  was  the 
nomination  of  the  new  officer.  Neither  have  the  Senate,  or  I 
believe  any  of  your  friends  in  this  body,  any  influence  which 
could  affect  a  nomination  in  favor  of  your  brother,  or  in  op- 
position to  that  which  was  made. 

With  respect  to  your  connection  with  General  Miranda,  of 
the  knowledge  which  the  President  or  Secretary  of  State  had 
of  his  projects,  I  know  nothing  but  what  is  to  be  collected 
from  the  newspapers;  never  having  had  any  communication 
from  you,  from  Miranda,  or  from  the  Executive  on  this  sub- 
ject.1 If  you  were  induced  to  believe  that  it  was  the  Presi- 
dent's intention  to  countenance  any  purpose  of  hostility  to 

ous  and  delicate  subject;  but  something  seems  necessary  to  be  done,  to  prevent  too 
much  petulance  and  impertinence."  John  Adams  to  John  Quincy  Adams,  Febru- 
ary 26,  1806.  Ms. 

'Your  disapprobation  of  the  bill  concerning  foreign  ministers,  which  I  intro- 
duced, reconciled  me  to  its  fate  more  than  the  decision  upon  it,  which  had  taken 
place  before  I  knew  your  opinion.  I  still  think,  however,  that  we  shall  find  some 
legislative  provision  necessary  upon  the  subject,  and  still  doubt  the  President's  con- 
stitutional powers,  without  a  law,  to  check  something  worse  than  insolence  in  a  for- 
eign minister,  if  it  should  happen."  To  John  Adams,  March  28,  1806.  Ms. 

1  The  history  of  Miranda's  projects  is  told  by  Robertson,  in  Am.  Historical  Associ' 
ation  Report,  1907,  I.  189. 


i8o6]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  139 

Spain,  I  very  much  regret  both  the  fact  and  its  consequences. 
That  he  had  no  such  intention  is  obvious  from  the  course  of 
policy  which  has  prevailed,  and  has  always  appeared  evident 
to  me,  from  the  time  when  I  had  last  the  pleasure  of  seeing 
you  at  New  York.  Of  the  grounds  you  may  have  had  for  a 
different  inference  I  am  unable  to  judge,  not  knowing  what 
they  were. 
I  am,  &c.L 

TO  WILLIAM  STEPHENS  SMITH 

WASHINGTON,  16  April,  1806. 
DEAR  SIR: 

I  have  within  these  few  days  successively  received  your 
two  letters,  one  of  them  containing  the  relation  of  the  cir- 
cumstances respecting  General  Miranda's  projects,  and  your 
relations  with  him  while  he  was  in  this  country,  and  the  other 
containing  the  request  that  I  would  write  an  oration  for  your 
son  John.  On  the  first  of  these  subjects  I  trust  that  in  the 
trial  of  the  cause  on  the  bill  found  by  the  Grand  Jury,  of 
which  I  have  seen  an  account  in  the  New  York  prints,  you 
will  have  competent  proof  to  produce  that  you  have  not 
violated  the  laws  of  the  United  States.  As  to  the  conduct  of 
the  President  and  Secretary  of  State,  whether  they  said  too 
much  to  Miranda,  or  whether  he  inferred  from  what  they 
said  or  did  more  than  he  was  warranted  to  infer,  I  am  at 
present  very  incompetent  to  determine.  That  he  misunder- 
stood or  misrepresented  their  real  intentions  I  have  no  doubt. 
Where  the  mistake  originated  must  remain  for  the  present  a 
matter  of  opinion. 

1  On  April  i,  Adams  spoke  against  a  bill  for  the  relief  of  Hamet  Caramelli,  ex- 
Bashaw  of  Tripoli.  His  speech  is  printed  in  Annals  of  Congress,  9th  Cong.,  ist 
Sess., 


I4o  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1806 

My  own  occupations  so  fully  engross  my  time  that  I  fear 
it  will  not  be  in  my  power  to  write  the  oration,  and  I  have  so 
much  confidence  in  the  genius  and  acquirements  of  your  son, 
that  I  believe  him  able  to  honor  himself  more  by  writing  his 
own  performance  at  his  Commencement,  than  by  depending 
upon  a  friend  for  the  production.  I  have  an  high  opinion  of 
his  good  sense,  discretion  and  application,  and  am  persuaded 
he  will  acquit  himself  very  creditably  without  any  assistance 
from  abroad. 

Congress  are  to  adjourn  next  Monday  the  2ist.  They 
break  up  under  a  variety  of  unpleasant  and  unpromising 
circumstances.  I  propose  to  leave  this  place  about  the 
25th,  and  hope  to  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  before  the 
last  of  the  month.  My  wife  remains  here  for  the  present,  and 
probably  will  remain  here  through  the  summer. 

I  am,  &c. 

TO  SAMUEL  BARRON  l 

WASHINGTON,  18  April,  1806. 
SIR: 

As  it  is  probable  that  the  transactions  relative  to  the  close 
of  the  war,  and  the  negotiations  for  the  peace  with  Tripoli, 
will  again  become  a  subject  of  deliberation  at  the  next  session 
of  Congress,  and  as  it  may  perhaps  not  be  in  my  power  to 
obtain  then  the  information  which  is  only  in  your  possession, 
and  which  I  think  important  to  elucidate  the  subject,  I  take 
the  liberty  to  request  your  answer  to  the  following  questions, 
and  also  for  any  other  information  relative  to  the  same  ob- 
ject which  you  may  think  proper  to  communicate. 

I.  What  was  your  particular  object  and  intention  in  sending 
Mr.  Eaton  into  Egypt  after  Hamet  Bashaw? 

1  Henry  Adams,  History,  II.  431. 


i8o6]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  141 

2.  Was  this  object  and  intention  understood  by  Mr.  Eaton  at 
that  time? 

3.  What  was  the  amount  of  the  supplies  furnished  by  you  to 
Hamet  Bashaw,  besides  those  for  which  Mr.  Eaton  was  account- 
able? 

4.  What  were  the  circumstances  which  induced  you  to  recom- 
mend  to  Mr.  Lear  the  negotiation  of  peace  with   the  reigning 
Bashaw? 

5.  Did  you  conceive  yourself  authorized  to  furnish  men  from 
the  squadron  to  lead  a  coup  de  main  against  Tripoli? 

6.  Do  you  know  what  number  of  men  Hamet  Bashaw  and  Mr. 
Eaton  had  with  them,  at  and  after  the  taking  of  Derne? 

7.  What  is  the  distance  from  Derne  to  Tripoli  by  land,  and 
what  is  your  opinion  of  the  practicability  of  Harriet's  marching  to 
Tripoli  with  the  force  he  had,  or  could  command? 

8.  What  was  the  information  of  Hamet  Bashaw's  want  of  means 
and  resources,  which  finally  induced  you  to  abandon  the  plan  of 
cooperation  with  him? 

9.  What  was  his  situation  in  Egypt  when  found  there  by  Mr. 
Eaton  ? 

And  if  you  have  no  objection  I  shall  also  thank  you  for  a 
certified  copy  of  that  letter  from  Mr.  Blake,  which  you  showed 
me,  wherein  the  conversation  between  Mr.  Eaton  and 
Hamet  Bashaw  was  related. 

If  you  can  further  refer  me  to  any  other  person  possessed 
of  information,  which  may  be  of  use  to  exhibit  the  real  state 
of  these  affairs,  I  shall  esteem  it  a  further  obligation  and  re- 
main, &C.1 

1  See  American  State  Papers,  Foreign  Relations,  II.  695. 


i42  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1806 

TO  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS 

May  i,  1806. 

...  I  am  lodged  at  the  City  Hotel.  Yesterday  I  dined 
with  Mr.  King  and  spent  the  last  evening  at  Colo.  Trum- 
bull's.  The  city  of  New  York  is  in  the  greatest  bustle  I 
ever  witnessed.  This  is  the  universal  moving  day,  and  about 
half  the  inhabitants  are  changing  their  places  of  abode.  They 
are  also  in  the  midst  of  a  warmly  contested  election  for  mem- 
bers of  Congress  and  of  their  state  legislature.  The  federal- 
ists, for  the  first  time  these  two  or  three  years,  have  run  no 
candidates  of  their  own,  and  though  they  do  not  much  expect 
to  carry  the  election,  there  is  no  doubt  but  they  will  come 
very  near  succeeding.  Besides  all  this  there  has  been  great 
agitation  in  the  city  from  the  unfortunate  occurrence  on 
Saturday  last.  The  British  ships  Leander  and  Cambrian  are 
lying  off  the  port,  and  a  shot  from  the  first  of  them  killed  a 
man  on  board  a  coasting  vessel  coming  from  the  Delaware. 
All  communication  with  the  ships  has  been  since  cut  off,  and 
two  or  three  of  their  officers  are  on  shore,  and  cannot  get  on 
board.  The  grand  jury  of  the  city  and  county  have  found  a 
bill  of  indictment  against  the  captain  of  the  Leander  for  mur- 
der, and  a  representation  of  the  facts  has  been  sent  on  to  the 
President  at  Washington,  where  no  doubt  you  will  hear 
much  of  this  event.  .  .  . 

May  10,  1806. 

.  .  .  On  Tuesday  I  went  with  my  father  to  Cambridge  to 
attend  the  inauguration  of  the  new  President  of  the  college, 
Mr.  [Samuel]  Webber.  The  ceremonies  of  the  day  were 
sufficiently  dull.  The  performances  mostly  in  Latin,  with  a 
comfortable  proportion  of  English  in  the  idiom  to  make  it 
intelligible.  There  was,  however,  a  young  gentleman  [Sam- 


i8o6]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  143 

uel  Gary],  just  out  of  college,  who  knew  more  about  making 
Latin,  as  they  call  it  at  school,  than  the  rest,  and  pronounced 
a  sort  of  complimentary  oration,  which  would  have  pleased 
me  very  well,  but  for  a  little  prophetical  sally,  in  which  he 
told  them  what  wonders  of  eloquence  they  were  to  perform 
when  the  new  professor  should  come.  My  turn  will  be  next, 
and  as  there  is  no  installation  without  a  speech,  I  have  asked 
the  privilege  of  pronouncing  it  in  a  language  which  I  can 
write,  and  the  hearers  can  understand.  I  expect  to  be  in- 
dulged, though  some  of  the  adherents  to  the  old  school  are 
very  tenacious  of  the  immemorial  usage  and  abhorrent  of 
innovation.  ...  At  Mr.  Amory's  I  met  Sir  Isaac  Coffin, 
a  British  admiral,  who  has  just  arrived  from  England.  .  .  . 
He  tells  me  that  Mr.  Merry  is  recalled,  and  a  Lord  Selkirk  ap- 
pointed in  his  stead.  This  Lord  Selkirk  is  said  to  be  a  great 
philosopher;  and  perhaps  may  be  of  great  use  to  you  know 
whom,  in  helping  to  make  a  moon.  .  .  . 

June  i,  1806. 

...  It  has  been  a  week  full  of  noise  and  bustle,  being 
what  we  call  election  week,  the  character  of  which  you  will 
remember.  The  legislature  met  on  Wednesday.  The  num- 
ber of  members  in  the  House  of  Representatives  is  upwards 
of  four  hundred  and  sixty,  and  nearly  double  the  number 
which  has  heretofore  been  usual.  The  democrats  have  a 
majority  of  about  fifty  members,  and  Mr.  Morton  was  of 
course  chosen  Speaker.  In  the  Senate  the  numbers  are  more 
equally  divided.  There  were  thirty-nine  members  chosen, 
of  whom  nineteen  are  federalists  and  twenty  democrats. 
They  have  found  it  impossible  as  yet  to  choose  a  President, 
the  votes  being  divided  between  Mr.  Otis  and  Mr.  [John] 
Bacon,  a  man  once  known  at  Washington.  They  have,  how- 
ever, made  him  preside  as  the  oldest  member,  and  have  filled 


i44  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1806 

up  the  vacancy  of  a  member,  which  will  give  them  a  decided 
majority.  We  are  still  uncertain  who  will  be  the  governor. 
There  is  a  majority  of  some  hundred  votes  in  favor  of  Mr. 
Strong;  but  the  two  houses  are  the  judges  of  the  returns,  and 
have  the  power  to  throw  out  all  the  votes  not  regularly  re- 
turned. It  is  supposed  that  a  sufficient  number  of  the  federal 
votes  will  be  rejected  to  take  off  the  majority,  and  then  the 
choice  will  be  made  by  the  legislature.  In  that  case  there  is 
no  doubt  but  Mr.  Sullivan  will  be  chosen.  .  .  .* 

June  8,  1806. 

.  .  .  Mr.  Sullivan  will  undoubtedly  be  governor.  Mr. 
Strong  had  indeed  a  full  majority  of  all  the  votes  returned; 
but  as  the  Senate  and  House  of  Representatives  decide  upon 
the  validity  of  the  returns,  and  as  there  is  a  majority  in  both 
houses  opposed  to  the  governor,  they  have  appointed  a  com- 
mittee who  reported  to  reject  as  not  legally  returned  just  votes 
enough  to  take  the  complete  majority  from  Strong.  Then 
the  election  is  to  be  made  by  the  legislature,  and  of  course 
Mr.  Sullivan  will  be  chosen.  The  Senate  have  already  ac- 
cepted the  report  of  the  committee,  and  it  goes  to  the  House 
of  Representatives  for  discussion  tomorrow.  The  issue  is 
foreseen,  but  it  has  already  taken  up  almost  as  much  time 
as  our  legislature  generally  sit  at  this  season  of  the  year.  .  .  . 

QUINCY,  15  June,  1806. 
....... 

On  Thursday  afternoon  at  5  o'clock,  the  installation  took 
place.  The  time  fixed  for  the  purpose  was  half  past  three; 
but  a  heavy  thunder  gust  came  up  exactly  at  that  time  and 
delayed  the  performances  nearly  two  hours.  It  also  pre- 

1  See  Stanwood,  Massachusetts  Election  in  1806,  2  Mass.  Hist.  Soc.  Proceed- 
ings, xx.  12. 


i8o6]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  145 

vented  the  attendance  of  many  persons,  and  the  company 
was  very  small.  The  heat  was  excessive,  and  I  suffered  much 
from  it.  The  auditory  were  I  believe  in  general  well  satis- 
fied with  my  discourse,  which  was  very  short.1  I  returned 
the  same  evening  to  Boston.  This  week  I  expect  to  go  to 
Cambridge  and  to  reside  there  three  or  four  months.  I  am 
to  have  a  chamber  at  Dr.  Waterhouse's. 

The  great  political  question  who  should  be  governor  is  at 
length  settled,  and  Mr.  Strong  is  in  for  one  year  more.  We 
had  a  clear  majority  of  all  the  votes  returned,  but  an  at- 
tempt was  made  and  pushed  with  an  unusual  violence  of 
party  spirit  to  reject  a  number  of  votes  sufficient  to  prevent 
him  from  having  a  majority  of  the  whole  number.  A  com- 
mittee of  the  two  houses  of  the  legislature,  five  demos  against 
two  federalists,  did  accomplish  the  object  as  far  as  depended 
on  them.  They  contrived  to  reject  just  votes  enough  to 
leave  the  governor  short  of  the  complete  majority  by  four- 
teen; and  it  is  amusing  to  observe  the  expedients  to  which 

1  As  Boylston  Professor  of  Rhetoric  and  Oratory.  See  Adams,  Memoirs,  June  12, 
1806.  The  inaugural  address  was  printed  at  the  request  of  the  students  as  a 
pamphlet. 

"This  address  was  in  the  highest  degree  elegant,  classical,  and  energetic;  abound- 
ing in  fertility  of  illustration,  force  of  delivery,  and  originality  of  remark.  Though 
'the  wand  of  Hermes  is  no  longer  the  sceptre  of  Empire,'  yet  the  Speaker  convinced 
us  that  eloquence  'has  awoke  from  her  slumbers  and  shaken  the  poppies  from  her. 
brow';  has  conquered  the  barbarism  of  Language,  by  softening  the  harshness  of  the 
English  into  the  harmony  of  the  Latin  tongue,  and  can  again  control  the  passions  of 
mankind  by  irresistible  persuasion."  The  Repertory,  June  17,  1806.  '  Mr.  Adams' 
Discourse  gave  high  gratification  to  an  intelligent  and  discriminating  audience.  .  .  . 
In  so  wide  a  field,  it  is  obvious  that  the  speaker  was  in  danger  of  being  oppressed 
with  the  multiplicity  of  his  topics,  and  that  the  principal  difficulty,  which  he  had  to 
encounter,  was  that  of  making  a  judicious  selection.  This  embarrassment  was 
completely  surmounted,  and  the  audience  was  delighted  with  a  free,  strong  and 
perspicuous  outline  of  the  nature,  history  and  practice  of  this  preeminent  art, 
sketched  by  the  hand  of  a  master.  We  congratulate  Alma  Mater  on  the  acquisition 
of  such  an  instructor."  Columbian  Centinel,  June  18,  1806. 


146  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1806 

they  resorted  for  that  purpose.  The  Senate  after  long  and 
warm  debates  accepted  the  report  of  the  committee  in  all  its 
parts,  but  the  members  of  the  minority  entered  a  protest 
against  the  decision,  which  has  appeared  in  all  our  news- 
papers and  shows  the  grounds  of  controversy.1  When  the 
report  however  pass'd  down  to  the  House  of  Representa- 
tives, many  of  the  party  began  to  stagger.  The  general 
sentiment  abroad  was  much  against  them,  and  their  own 
partisans  were  ashamed  to  support  what  they  were  doing. 
All  of  a  sudden  they  bethought  themselves  to  reject  the  votes 
of  two  towns  more,  by  which  means  the  majority  was  re- 
stored to  Mr.  Strong:  they  immediately  declared  him  to  be 
chosen.  And  when  I  left  Boston  on  Thursday  to  go  up  to 
Cambridge  all  the  bells  were  ringing  for  joy  that  he  was  hav- 
ing the  oaths  of  office  administered  to  him.  He  is,  however, 
the  only  federalist  left  in  the  government.  The  legislature 
have  changed  all  the  officers  annually  elected  by  them,  and 
the  governor's  council  is  completely  altered. 

We  are  in  expectation  of  a  total  eclipse  of  the  sun  to- 
morrow morning.  This  is  a  very  rare  occurrence  and  has 
never  been  known  to  happen  in  Boston  since  the  settlement 
of  the  country.  There  is,  indeed,  some  little  question  whether 
it  will  be  total  here  even  now,  as  there  are  two  calculations, 
one  of  which  makes  it  less  than  total  by  about  a  minute  and 
a  half.  At  Washington  you  will  see  it  very  large,  but  the 
sun  will  not  be  wholly  eclipsed  by  nearly  one-twelfth.  The 
little  society  which  you  remember  I  once  belonged  to  in 
Boston  have  made  some  preparations  for  observing  it  with 
some  attention,  and  are  provided  with  glasses  for  the  pur- 
pose. I  have  agreed  to  meet  with  them  in  Mr.  Bussey's 
garden,  which  he  has  offered  them  to  take  their  observations. 

•  •••••• 

1  See  The  Repertory,  June  13,  1 806. 


i8o6]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  147 

CAMBRIDGE,  22  June,  1806. 
•  •••••• 

I  just  mentioned  to  you  in  a  line  which  I  wrote  you  on 
Wednesday  that  I  had  with  a  company  of  philosophers  ob- 
served the  eclipse  in  Mr.  Bussey's  garden.  It  was  indeed  a 
very  remarkable  sight.  The  principal  part  of  it  you  must 
have  witness'd  at  Washington,  but  many  of  the  most  curious 
phenomena  were  those  which  arose  from  the  total  obscuration 
of  the  sun.  His  face  was  entirely  covered  at  Boston  about 
four  minutes  and  a  half.  The  darkness  was  such  that  it 
would  have  been  impossible  to  read  a  small  print,  and  I  was 
obliged  to  use  a  lanthorn  to  observe  the  state  of  my  ther- 
mometer. The  fowls  roosted.  The  lowing  herd  wound 
slowly  o'er  the  lea.  The  western  horizon  with  a  sky  per- 
fectly serene  looked  as  if  it  had  been  charged  with  one  of  the 
heaviest  thunder  clouds.  The  moon  appeared  like  a  patch 
of  court  plaister  upon  the  face  of  Heaven,  and  all  round  the 
edges  of  her  disk  was  a  luminous  border  like  that  which  you 
sometimes  see  round  the  edges  of  a  dark  cloud.  Just  before 
the  sun  came  out  the  edge  of  the  moon  on  the  side  from  which 
he  was  to  proceed  assumed  a  deep  crimson  color,  but  never 
since  my  existence  have  I  seen  anything  like  the  brightness 
of  the  first  beam  which  he  shot  forth  upon  his  return.  The 
naked  eye  could  not  bear  it  for  an  instant,  though  for  several 
minutes  before  his  face  was  entirely  closed  in  he  suffered  us 
to  look  at  him.  I  know  not  the  philosophical  reason  why  the 
first  rays  of  reviving  splendor  should  be  so  much  more  daz- 
zling than  the  last  beams  of  expiring  glory,  but  such  was  the 
fact.  From  the  commencement  of  the  eclipse  to  the  time  of 
the  total  obscurity  the  thermometer  fell  eleven  degrees,  and 
by  the  time  the  moon  fully  disappeared  it  had  risen  again 
about  as  much,  being  all  the  time  in  the  shade.1 

1  See  Adams,  Memoirs,  June  16,  1806. 


148  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1806 

I  have  seen  in  the  newspaper  account  of  the  death  of  Mr. 
George  Wythe,  a  Judge  of  the  Court  of  Chancery  in  Virginia, 
and  a  man  much  distinguished  during  an  important  period 
of  the  American  Revolution.  He  was  at  one  time  an  inti- 
mate friend  of  my  father,  who  once  address'd  to  him  a  letter 
on  the  subject  of  government  which  has  often  been  pub- 
lished. Of  late  years  he,  like  so  many  other  persons  of  the 
revolutionary  times,  had  forgotten  ancient  friendships  and 
had  fallen  into  another  political  scale;  yet  he  had  not  lost 
his  place  in  my  father's  regard,  and  I  am  sure  he  has  been 
much  affected  at  the  incident,  particularly,  as  by  a  para- 
graph in  the  Richmond  Enquirer,  it  appears  there  were  sus- 
picions that  Mr.  Wythe's  death  was  not  in  the  ordinary 
course  of  nature.  On  whom  the  suspicions  have  fallen  the 
papers  do  not  say,  but  probably  as  it  is  in  your  neighborhood, 
and  as  he  was  a  man  of  so  distinguished  a  character,  you 
may  have  heard.  If  you  have,  let  me  know  how  the  circum- 
stances are  told.1 


TO  THE  CORPORATION  OF  HARVARD  UNIVERSITY 

CAMBRIDGE,  26  June,  1806. 
GENTLEMEN: 

By  the  sixth  article  of  the  rules  and  regulations  for  the 
Boylston  professorship  of  rhetoric  and  oratory,  it  is  directed 
that  the  professor  shall  read  a  course  of  public  lectures  at 
least  once  a  week  to  the  resident  graduates  and  two  senior 
classes  of  undergraduates  on  the  subject  of  his  profession. 
The  general  object  of  which  is,  that  it  shall  contain  a  system 
of  rhetoric  conformable  to  the  models  of  the  ancients. 

To  comply  with  the  main  purpose  of  this  article  I  was  pre- 

1  The  nephew  was  tried  on  a  charge  of  poisoning  his  uncle,  but  was  acquitted. 


i8o6]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  149 

K 

pared  to  deliver  the  first  lecture  of  this  course,  and  the  day 
was  fixed  for  it  (this  day),  when  an  idea  occurred  to  me  which 
has  induced  me  to  postpone  it,  until  I  can  request  of  you  and 
of  the  Overseers,  if  you  deem  an  act  of  that  body  necessary  — 
that  the  class  now  Sophomores,  but  to  commence  Juniors  at 
the  next  commencement,  may  be  permitted  to  attend  my 
course  of  lectures  from  the  beginning.  My  reason  for  this  is, 
that  as  this  class  will  of  right  attend  the  course  after  com- 
mencement, it  will  probably  be  of  material  use  to  them  (so 
far  as  the  whole  course  may  be  of  use,)  to  hear  the  first 
five  or  six  lectures.  Otherwise  they  will  be  required  to  attend 
the  lectures  during  the  two  years  they  will  remain  at  college, 
and  yet  after  all  have  only  a  fragment  of  the  whole,  not  hav- 
ing been  permitted  to  attend  the  first  five  or  six. 

I  have  also  to  remark  that  the  minuteness  of  detail  into 
which  this  same  article  enters  to  prescribe  the  particulars  of 
this  course  appears  to  me  altogether  unnecessary,  and  if  to 
be  adhered  to  according  to  the  letter,  would  impose  upon  me 
shackles  to  which  I  am  not  inclined  to  submit.  The  divisions 
and  subdivisions  of  the  science  and  the  proper  means  for 
pursuing  its  study  might,  I  suppose,  in  general  be  left  to  the 
judgment  of  the  professor.  Indeed  I  always  so  understood 
that  it  was  intended  by  the  Corporation  and  Overseers.  If  I 
have  been  mistaken,  I  must  request  the  article  may  be  modi- 
fied, that  the  general  object  of  the  course  remaining  the  same, 
both  the  form  and  the  substance  of  the  lectures  may  be  left 
to  the  professor's  discretion.  I  am,  &c. 

P.  S.  I  must  request  a  decision  as  soon  as  can  be  conven- 
ient upon  the  subject  of  this  letter,  as  I  shall  immediately 
after  receiving  it  commence  the  course. 


1 50  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1806 

TO  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS 

QUINCY,  29  June,  1806. 
•  •••••• 

I  have  spent  the  week  at  Cambridge  in  a  state  of  great 
tranquillity  and  without  the  occurrence  of  any  incident  worth 
mentioning  to  you,  except  the  commencement  of  my  new 
duties.    I  found  it  irksome  enough,  and  myself  very  awkward 
in  the  business;  yet  I  believe  it  a  situation  in  which  I  can 
be  of  much  more  service  to  my  country  than  in  that  where 
your  fond  partiality  supposes  me  to  be  of  some  use.    I  have 
at  present,  however,  no  intention  to  resign.    The  term  of  my 
public  service  will  soon  be  at  an  end,  and  in  the  present  con- 
dition of  politics  in  this  state,  as  well  as  almost  all  the  rest, 
there  is  no  danger  that  when  my  time  expires  I  shall  have 
the  opportunity  to  continue  in  public  life.     It  is,  therefore, 
proper  to  seek  by  any  anticipation  the  motives  of  comfort 
against  the  mortification  of  being  displaced,  a  sort  of  censure 
the  commonness  of  which,  as  well  as  the  respectability  of 
character  of  those  who  have  suffered  it,  has  purified  from  all 
disgrace,  but  which  when  it  comes  I  suppose  every  one  must 
in  some  measure  feel.    We  are  verging  to  a  state  of  things 
not  very  consistent  with  the  principles  of  republican  govern- 
ment, but  through  which  all  republics  must  pass;  a  state  of 
things,  in  which  merit  of  any  kind  whatsoever  will  be  no 
consideration  at  all,  or  at  best  but  a  very  subordinate  con- 
sideration, and  when  the  only  essential  qualification  for  office 
will  be  party.    We  have,  indeed,  advanced  very  far  in  this 
course,  and  are  taking  strides  towards  its  utmost  bounds 
every  day.    The  legislature  of  this  state,  since  the  change  in 
their  political  character,  have  displaced  without  exception 
every  man  in  office  whom  they  could  remove,  and  who  was 


i8o6]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  151 

suspected  of  federalism.  This  is  the  first  instance  in  which 
anything  of  that  kind  has  been  done  in  this  state,  though 
it  is  only  an  imitation  of  what  has  been  done  by  the  govern- 
ment of  the  United  States,  and  by  all  the  other  states  which 
have  undergone  the  same  change.  When  the  tide  shall  turn 
again,  which  sooner  or  later  it  certainly  will,  this  example 
will  inevitably  be  followed,  not  improbably  with  some  addi- 
tional aggravations;  because  in  addition  to  the  same  motive 
for  getting  the  places  which  has  occasioned  the  revolution 
in  the  first  instance,  there  will  be  much  individual  resentment 
to  gratify,  and  much  rancor  of  revenge  to  indulge.  .  .  . 

My  present  situation  continues  as  agreeable  as  when  I 
wrote  you  last.  Mrs.  Waterhouse  is  an  agreeable  and  pleas- 
ant tempered  woman,  and  the  Doctor  a  man  of  learning, 
ingenuity  and  wit.  The  time  during  which  I  associate  with 
the  family  is,  therefore,  rendered  agreeable  to  me,  and  that 
which  I  employ  in  my  chamber  is  quiet  and  uninterrupted, 
leaving  me  the  means  of  that  close  application  which  I  find 
indispensably  necessary  and  without  which  I  should  even- 
tually disgrace  this  new  institution.  On  this  subject  I  feel  a 
concern  and  solicitude  which  you  who  know  my  natural  dis- 
position will  readily  conceive,  and  which  is  much  increased 
by  the  high  expectations  which  I  continually  hear  are  formed 
from  my  appointment.  I  know  how  apt  high  expectations 
are  to  be  disappointed,  and  foresee  the  probability  of  adding 
to  the  number  of  such  examples;  hence  the  present  is  a  mo- 
ment of  anxiety  as  well  as  of  labor,  and  I  need  all  the  tran- 
quillity I  can  obtain  to  keep  a  due  possession  of  myself. 


152  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1806 

QUINCY,  13  July,  1806. 
•  •••••• 

I  have  seen  in  the  newspapers  some  account  of  the  new 
disputes  between  the  two  Randolphs,1  and  some  of  them  have 
gone  so  far  as  to  appoint  the  day  upon  which  they  were  to 
meet,  which  they  fixed  on  the  28th  of  last  month.  But  I 
have  seen  a  Richmond  Enquirer  of  4  July  in  which  the  war 
seems  still  carried  on  upon  paper,  in  which  I  suppose  it  will 
end.  As  far  as  I  have  seen  there  is  no  real  cause  alleged  for 
which  they  could  reasonably  quarrel,  and  if  either  of  them 
should  kill  the  other,  he  would  be  very  much  puzzled  to  give 
himself  or  to  any  other  person  the  why.  But  the  real  reason 
is  concealed.  The  real  reason  is  the  antagonism  of  ambition 
and  the  rankling  at  heart  of  political  opposition.  I  hope 
they  will  take  care  to  shoot  none  but  the  paper  bullets  of  the 
brain. 

The  newspapers  have  pretended  that  William  Smith  2  (my 
sister's  son)  was  one  of  the  persons  taken  in  Miranda's 
schooner.  But  this  was  a  misrepresentation  or  mistake. 
They  have  had  letters  from  William  dated  12  June,  after  the 
capture  of  the  schooner,  when  he  was  yet  safe.  But  would 
you  believe  that  the  Marquis  Yrujo  wrote  a  letter  to  Gen- 
eral Dayton  with  intimations  that  William  Smith  was  one 
of  the  prisoners;  that  they  would  all  be  put  to  death  unless 
by  some  powerful  intercession  some  single  individuals  of 
them  might  be  spared,  and  that  He  would  intercede  for 
William  on  condition  that  Colonel  Smith  would  discover  to 
him  everything  that  he  knew  of  Miranda's  plans,  and  the 
names  of  the  Spaniards  with  him,  and  in  short  everything 
that  could  be  confessed  by  a  criminal  under  sentence  of  death 

1  John  Randolph  of  Roanoke  and  Thomas  Mann  Randolph,  son-in-law  of  Jef- 
ferson. 

2  William  Steuben  Smith,  son  of  William  Stephens  and  Abigail  (Adams)  Smith. 


i8o6]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  153 

to  save  himself.1  The  Colonel  returned  a  very  spirited,  in- 
dignant and  proper  answer.  I  wish  William  was  at  home.  I 
wish  neither  he  nor  his  father  had  ever  had  any  concern  with 
this  knight-errant  expedition.  But  I  had  rather  tremble, 
nay,  I  had  rather  weep,  for  my  friends  than  blush  for  them. 
Yrujo  knows  little  of  Colonel  Smith  or  of  any  person  who 
feels  an  interest  of  blood  or  of  affection  in  his  sons,  if  he 
thought  they  would  save  his  life  upon  such  a  proposition. 
It  gives  a  despicable  opinion  of  his  own  heart  that  he  could 
make  it  or  expect  any  advantage  from  it.  The  Colonel's 
trial  is  fixed  for  tomorrow,  and  unhappily  Judge  Paterson 
will  not  be  there.  What  the  government  means  to  do  for 
him  or  Ogden  2  time  will  show.3  As  far  as  relates  to  Colonel 
Smith  the  President  I  should  think  has  already  done  enough. 
He  has  ruined  him  as  completely  as  his  heart  could  wish. 
More  is  unnecessary.  .  .  . 


TO  NOAH  WEBSTER 

QUINCY,  5  November,  1806. 
SIR: 

I  received  some  time  since  through  the  hands  of  Judge 
Dawes  your  favor  of  12  August,  together  with  a  copy  of 
your  Dictionary,  and  a  newspaper  containing  the  strictures 
of  a  critic  at  Albany,  and  your  reply  to  them.  My  thanks 
for  your  obliging  present  ought  ere  this  to  have  been  returned 
to  you,  and  would  have  been  but  for  a  pressure  of  occupation 

1  The  letters  of  Yrujo  and  Smith  are  in  The  Repertory,  July  22,  1806;  that  of 
Dayton,  July  25. 

2  Samuel  G.  Ogden. 

3  Smith  and  Ogden  were  acquitted.    Robertson,  Miranda,  374. 

4  The  criticism  and  the  reply  are  printed  in  the  Connecticut  Herald,  August  12, 
1806. 


154  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1806 

at  this  time,  and  from  a  desire  with  full  deliberation  to  give 
you  my  candid  opinion  respecting  your  project  for  a  larger 
Dictionary. 

There  are  three  objections  made  against  your  plan  by  the 
critic  of  Albany,  relating  first,  to  your  peculiarities  of  spell- 
ing; secondly,  to  your  principles  of  pronunciation,  and 
thirdly,  to  the  introduction  into  your  Dictionary  of  local 
vulgarisms. 

With  regard  to  the  two  first  I  have  always  considered 
them  as  under  the  absolute  dominion  of  fashion.  And  as  we 
are  in  the  habit  of  receiving  all  our  fashions  from  England, 
this  has  been  regularly  imported  with  the  rest.  I  have  never 
thought  it  a  subject  worth  contending  about.  It  is  true  we 
can  manufacture  words,  as  we  can  manufacture  broad-cloths, 
for  ourselves.  And  we  can  insist  upon  spelling  or  pronounc- 
ing them  as  they  ought  to  be,  or  as  our  great  grandfathers 
spelt  or  pronounced  them,  as  we  can  dress  in  the  costume  of 
the  seventeenth  century,  or  cut  our  clothes  upon  a  philo- 
sophical principle  of  convenience,  if  we  please.  Every  in- 
dividual must  in  this  respect  act  for  himself.  A  patriotic 
spirit  will  from  a  sense  of  duty  encourage  a  domestic  manu- 
facture, but  to  prescribe  their  use  by  law,  and  to  prohibit  the 
introduction  of  them  from  Great  Britain,  is  at  least  of  more 
questionable  policy,  and  perhaps  not  quite  so  practicable. 

Alterations  of  spelling  or  pronunciation  upon  the  authority 
of  a  single  writer  have  an  inevitable  tendency  to  introduce 
confusion  into  a  language.  Voltaire  undertook  to  introduce 
a  new  system  of  spelling  into  the  French  language.  Yet  his 
authority  has  not  even  to  this  day  generally  prevailed,  and 
the  greater  part  of  the  French  nation  spell  as  their  fathers  did. 
Many  writers  however  have  followed  his  example,  and  a 
numerous  class  of  words  are  consequently  spelt  two  different 
ways.  I  am  apprehensive  that  your  example  and  authority 


i8o6]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  155 

may  produce  a  similar  inconvenience  to  the  writers  and 
speakers  of  English.  That  is,  if  you  adhere  to  the  intention 
of  setting  up  a  standard  of  spelling  or  pronunciation  dif- 
ferent from  that  which  is  admitted  in  England. 

The  sentiments  indeed  which  you  express  to  me  in  your 
letter  of  the  inconveniences  and  impracticability  of  attempt- 
ing to  impose  dogmas  upon  others  in  respect  to  pronunciation 
are  so  perfectly  congenial  to  my  own,  that  I  could  not  but 
regret  to  find  that  our  inference  from  these  principles  was  not 
exactly  the  same.  My  own  conclusion  is  to  take  the  stand- 
ard as  I  find  it,  and  shun  all  controversy  upon  the  subject. 
Yours,  I  observe,  is  to  take  nearly  the  standard  of  Entick, 
and  to  reject  all  subsequent  changes  as  innovations  of  the 
English  stage  and  court.  That  innovation  in  many  of  the 
cases  where  you  differ  from  them  is  chargeable  upon  them, 
and  not  upon  you,  I  readily  believe;  but  the  question  seems 
to  be,  not  who  was  the  innovator,  but  whether  a  different 
and  a  hostile  standard  shall  be  resorted  to.  Now  if  I  deemed 
a  new  standard  necessary,  I  know  not  where  I  could  find  one 
which  I  should  prefer  to  yours.  But  I  am  not  entirely  con- 
vinced that  any  new  one  is  desirable. 

Your  remark  that  the  English  lexicographers  are  not 
agreed  among  themselves,  is  undoubtedly  a  strong  argument 
to  dissuade  us  from  absolute  and  unqualified  submission  to 
any  one  of  them.1  Nor  is  the  authority  of  any  of  them  con- 
sidered as  irrefragable.  Each  of  them  has  his  influence,  and 
his  peculiarities  are  adopted  or  rejected  according  to  the 
weight  of  his  reasons  or  the  fluctuations  of  public  taste. 
Standing  on  the  same  ground  with  them  as  a  philologist,  your 

1  "August  II,  1807.  Mr.  Monroe,  the  printer,  of  the  partners  Oliver  and  Monroe, 
came  to  me  to  write  him  proposals  for  publishing  an  edition  of  Johnson's  large  Dic- 
tionary, and  requested  me  to  superintend  the  publication;  the  last  of  which  I  de- 
clined." Ms.  Diary. 


iS6  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1806 

opinions  will  doubtless  have  their  deserved  weight;  but  I  do 
not  think  it  your  wish,  nor  should  I  deem  it  proper,  to  engage 
national  prejudices  or  passions  in  the  cause.  I  would  neither 
adopt  nor  reject  a  mode  of  spelling  or  of  pronunciation, 
either  from  deference  or  from  resistance  to  the  English  Court 
or  stage.  I  would  not  agree  with  them  to  prove  my  conde- 
scension, nor  differ  from  them  to  mark  my  independence. 

With  respect  to  the  introduction  into  your  Dictionary  of 
new  words  your  reasoning,  both  in  the  preface  and  in  your 
reply  to  the  critic  at  Albany,  is  forcible,  and  to  a  certain  de- 
gree conclusive.  Where  we  have  invented  new  words,  or 
adopted  new  senses  to  old  words,  it  appears  but  reasonable 
that  our  dictionaries  should  contain  them.  Yet  there  are 
always  a  multitude  of  words  current  within  particular  neigh- 
borhoods, or  during  short  periods  of  time,  which  ought  never 
to  be  admitted  into  the  legitimate  vocabulary  of  a  language. 
A  very  good  proportion  of  the  words  of  American  origin  are 
of  this  description,  and  I  confess  that  I  should  prefer  to  see 
them  systematically  excluded,  rather  than  hunted  up  for 
admission  into  a  dictionary  of  classical  English.  In  your 
undertaking  to  compile  a  large  Dictionary  to  supersede  those 
which  come  to  us  from  England,  it  must  doubtless  be  neces- 
sary to  proceed  upon  some  general  principle.  Yet  I  presume 
you  will  not  think  it  necessary  to  insert  a  great  number  of 
words  which  are  in  very  common  use.  Between  vulgarism 
and  propriety  of  speech  some  line  must  be  drawn,  and  where 
that  shall  precisely  be  may  perhaps  be  a  question  of  some 
difficulty.  Your  liberality  of  admission  in  the  compendious 
Dictionary  extends  so  far,  that  I  should  prefer  to  find  in  the 
larger  work  a  restriction  rather  than  an  enlargement  of  it. 

I  have  not  had  an  opportunity  of  exchanging  sentiments 
with  President  Webber  or  Professor  Ware  with  respect  to 
your  undertaking,  and  know  not  how  far  they  would  deem  it 


i8o6]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  157 

advisable  to  pledge  our  University  to  support  your  system 
of  spelling,  pronunciation,  or  of  departure  from  the  English 
language.  Though  not  entirely  coinciding  with  you  in  opin- 
ion upon  these  subjects,  I  hope  you  will  be  persuaded  of  the 
sincerity  with  which  I  appreciate  your  genius  and  learning, 
and  of  my  respect  for  the  depth  and  extent  of  your  researches 
upon  this  and  other  subjects  of  high  moment  to  our  country. 
I  have  thought  a  free  and  explicit  avowal  of  my  own  impres- 
sions would  be  most  satisfactory  to  you,  in  answer  to  the 
confidence  with  which  you  had  favored  me,  although  the 
principles  which  I  have  accustomed  myself  to  apply  in  these 
cases  have  led  me  to  deductions,  differing  in  some  respects 
from  yours.  I  am,  &C.1 

1  "Eaton's  story  about  the  offers  made  him  by  Burr  has  now  been  served  up  in 
all  the  newspapers.  Burr's  story  we  have  not  yet  heard.  Eaton  himself  would  have 
been  wiser  had  he  been  more  silent.  The  amount  of  his  narrative  is,  that  he  advised 
the  President  to  send  Burr  upon  an  important  embassy,  BECAUSE  !!!  he  had  dis- 
covered the  said  Burr  to  be  a  Traitor  to  his  country. 

"I  send  you  some  documents  to  read,  or  to  dispose  of  as  you  please.  Wilkinson1  s 
letter  is  a  curiosity,  as  perfectly  characteristic.  Tis  Don  Adriano  de  Armado  the 
second."  To  Louisa  Catherine  Adams,  December  8,  1806.  Ms. 

"We  have  hitherto  had  no  business  to  occasion  debate;  but  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives have  again  passed  a  bill  for  a  bridge  over  the  Potomac,  which  is  now  be- 
fore the  Senate,  and  has  already  been  two  or  three  times  postponed.  The  parties  on 
both  sides  are  warmer  than  they  have  ever  been  before,  and  I  expect  we  shall  have  a 
very  animated  discussion  of  the  question.  The  time  now  fixed  for  it  is  next  Monday. 
The  General  Assembly  of  Maryland  have  passed  a  resolution  instructing  their  Sena- 
tors to  use  their  influence  against  it;  and  Mr.  Giles,  who  is  here,  takes  a  very  strong 
interest  against  it;  but  Mr.  Bayard  and  Mr.  White  are  quite  as  zealous  in  its  favor; 
and  as  far  as  I  can  judge  the  opinion  of  the  Senate  is  very  equally  divided.  The 
probability  seems  to  me  that  the  bill  will  pass."  To  Louisa  Catherine  Adams,  Jan- 
uary 14,  1807.  Ms. 


158  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1807 

TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

WASHINGTON,  January  27,  1807. 
•  •••••* 

Mr.  Burr  and  his  conspiracy  have  begun  to  occupy  our 
attention.  Last  Friday  (23d)  the  Senate  with  closed  doors 
passed  an  act  suspending  in  certain  cases  the  privilege  of  the 
writ  of  habeas  corpus.  The  business  was  finished  in  one  day, 
with  a  slight  opposition  from  Mr.  Bayard,  who  voted  alone 
against  the  bill,  but  did  not  use  his  privilege  of  forbidding  the 
reading  of  the  bill  three  times  on  the  same  day.1  The  House 
of  Representatives  adjourned  over  until  Monday  before  we 
had  finished.  Yesterday  morning  the  message  and  the  bill 
were  sent  to  them  in  confidence.2  They  immediately  opened 
their  doors,  and  almost  unanimously  rejected  the  bill  at  the 
first  reading.  I  have  enclosed  to  you  the  papers  from  the 
President  upon  which  the  Senate  acted.  Bollman  and 
Swaftwout 3  who  were  arrested  by  General  Wilkinson  are 
now  here,  and  it  seems  questionable  what  can  be  done  with 
them.  The  general  subject  is  yet  mysterious,  but  there  is  a 
concurrence  of  testimony  establishing  facts  more  important, 
as  they  respect  the  operation  of  our  Institutions,  and  future 
prospects  of  this  country  than  most  of  us  appear  to  be 
aware  of. 

These  two  subjects  and  the  projects  for  prohibiting  the 
importation  of  slaves  into  the  United  States  after  I  January 
next  exclusively  engross  our  attention.  We  have  in  the  two 

1  The  committee,  appointed  on  the  same  day  for  preparing  the  bill  were  William 
B.  Giles,  John  Quincy  Adams  and  Samuel  Smith. 

2  Printed  in  Annals  of  Congress,  Qth  Cong.,  2  Sess.,  39. 

3  Erick  Bollman  and  Samuel  Swartwout.    The  President's  messages  upon  Burr's 
conspiracy  were  referred  to  William  B.  Giles,  James  A.  Bayard  and  John  Quincy 
Adams.    Ib.,  45. 


i8o7]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  159 

houses  had  seven  different  printed  bills  for  this  purpose;  and 
at  length  we  have  passed  a  bill  in  Senate  which  has  this  day 
gone  to  the  House  of  Representatives. 

30  January. 

The  part  I  have  taken  in  the  business  of  the  last  three 
days,  and  the  important  transactions  now  going  on  in  the 
Circuit  Court  here,  have  prevented  me  from  finishing  this 
letter.  I  inclose  you  a  newspaper  in  which  you  will  find  the 
proceedings  hitherto  on  the  singular  cases  of  Bollman  and 
Swartwout,  which  are  still  under  argument,  by  the  District 
Attorney  l  and  present  Attorney  General,2  on  a  motion  for 
their  commitment  on  a  charge  of  treason,  and  by  the  late 
Attorney  General,  Mr.  Charles  Lee,  and  a  young  Mr.  Key,3 
for  the  prisoners.  They  are  now  before  the  Court,  and  excite 
such  universal  curiosity  that  we  are  scarcely  able  here  to 
form  a  quorum  to  do  business  and  the  House  of  Representa- 
tives actually  adjourned  this  morning  for  want  of  a  quorum. 

We  were  almost  without  public  business  during  the  first 
six  weeks  of  the  session,  and  I  employed  the  leisure  time 
principally  to  prepare  for  my  labors  of  the  ensuing  spring. 
I  have  also  continued  my  application  to  the  Greek,  and  have 
read  through  the  Odyssey  in  the  original.  I  selected  this 
because  I  have  it  in  a  single  small  volume  with  a  Latin  version 
at  the  side,  but  without  a  commentary.  There  is  no  great 
plenty  of  Greek  books  here.  I  found  so  long  as  the  mind  was 
unagitated  by  other  subjects  of  meditation,  and  the  feelings 
in  a  state  of  tranquillity,  I  could  read  and  understand  Homer 
much  better  than  I  can  since  the  public  business  has  taken 
hold  of  me.  I  now  read  without  understanding  much. 

1 Jones. 


2  John  Breckenridger  (1760-1806). 

3  Francis  Scott  Key  (1780-1843). 


160  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1807 

I  have  been  taken  off  from  the  possibility  of  finishing  my 
letter  by  a  debate  which  I  have  been  obliged  to  support  for 
the  whole  of  this  day,  on  a  bill  of  little  importance,  but  which 
I  happened  to  report.  Upon  such  bills  I  have  never  had  the 
good  fortune  to  escape  hard  pushing  and  struggling;  but  we 
passed  half  a  dozen  other  bills  without  raising  half  an  hour's 
discussion. 

It  is  now  almost  four.  The  Circuit  Court  have  committed 
Bollman  and  Swartwout  without  bail  or  mainprize  —  Judge 
Cranch  dissenting.  Ever  faithfully  your  son.1 

1  "January  30.    Mr.  Adams  made  the  following  motion,  which  was  read: 

"Resolved,  that  the  following  rule  be  added  to  the  rules  for  conducting  business 
in  the  Senate. 

"The  final  question  upon  the  second  reading  of  every  bill,  resolution,  Constitu- 
tional amendment,  or  motion,  originating  in  the  Senate,  and  requiring  three  read- 
ings previous  to  its  being  passed,  shall  be,  whether  it  shall  be  engrossed  and  read  a 
third  time?  And  no  amendment  shall  be  received  for  discussion  at  the  third  reading 
of  any  bill,  resolution,  amendment,  or  motion,  unless  by  unanimous  consent  of  the 
members  present."  The  motion  was  amended  and  after  debate  was  adopted 
March  3,  Adams  voting  in  the  negative.  Annals  of  Congress,  9th  Cong.,  2nd  Sess., 
49,  53,  104. 

:'The  Potomac  bridge  question  is  at  last  postponed  until  the  next  session  of  Con- 
gress, after  seven  days  of  as  warm  and  close  debate  as  I  ever  witnessed  in  the  Senate. 
The  postponement  was  carried  by  a  single  vote,  seventeen  to  sixteen,  and  in  all  prob- 
ability had  the  question  on  the  bill  itself  been  taken,  it  would  have  prevailed.  .  .  . 

;'The  bridge  is  for  the  present  dismissed;  but  king  Burr  furnishes  a  topic  of  no 
less  interest  and  agitation  in  its  stead.  Two  of  his  agents,  Bollman  and  Swartwout, 
who  were  employed  to  seduce  General  Wilkinson  and  the  army,  and  whom  the  Gen- 
eral seized  and  sent  here,  have  been  committed  upon  a  charge  of  high  treason,  but  I 
suppose  they  must  be  sent  back  to  New  Orleans  for  trial.  At  least  they  cannot,  as 
I  believe,  be  tried  here."  To  Louisa  Catherine  Adams,  February  I,  1807.  Ms. 

'Your  father  was  for  a  considerable  time  much  concerned  about  the  bill  which 
passed  so  rapidly  through  the  Senate,  and  still  cannot  account  for  the  vote  of  a  cer- 
tain friend  of  mine.  It  never  caused  me  the  slightest  anxiety  as  I  know  your  opin- 
ions to  be  generally  formed  upon  mature  reflection  and  deliberation,  and  almost 
always  correct.  He  has  taxed  me  once  or  twice  upon  two  of  your  former  votes,  as  if 
he  suspected  my  having  been  concerned  in  the  subject,  which  makes  me  smile.  No 
woman  certainly  ever  interfered  less  in  affairs  of  this  kind  than  I  have,  and  if  I  ever 
possessed  any  influence,  I  certainly  have  never  exerted  it.  However,  these  two  votes 


1807]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  161 

CHESAPEAKE-LEOPARD  AFFAIR  1 

July  1 6,  1807. 

Whereas,  by  the  communication  from  Norfolk,  Portsmouth,  and 
their  vicinities,  and  the  Proclamation  of  the  President  of  the  United 
States,  it  appears  the  sovereignty  of  our  country  has  been  insulted, 
and  the  lives  of  our  citizens  sacrificed,  by  the  unjustifiable  conduct 
of  a  British  armed  ship. 

1.  Resolved,  That  we  consider  the  unprovoked  attack  made  on 
the  United  States  armed  ship  the  Chesapeake,  by  the  British  ship 
of  war  the  Leopard,  a  wanton  outrage  upon  the  lives  of  our  fellow 
citizens,  a  direct  violation  of  our  national  honor,  and  an  infringe- 
ment of  our  national  rights  and  sovereignty. 

2.  Resolved,  That  we  most  sincerely  approve  the  Proclamation,2 
and  the  firm  and  dispassionate  course  of  policy  pursued  by  the 
President  of  the  United  States;  and  we  will  cordially  unite  with 

he  says,  he  never  can  forgive,  and  I  suspect  he  has  since  included  the  last  among  the 
number."     Louisa  Catherine  Adams  to  John  Quincy  Adams,  February  15,  1807. 

On  February  24,  Adams  appears  to  have  made  a  speech  on  the  Chesapeake  and 
Delaware  Canal  Bill;  but  its  argument  is  known  only  through  the  reply  made  by 
Samuel  White  of  Delaware.  Annals  of  Congress,  Qth  Cong.,  2nd  Sess.,  80. 

1  Intelligence  of  the  attack  upon  the  Chesapeake  by  the  British  ship  the  Leopard 
reached  Boston  June  30.  The  federalists  saw  no  reason  for  calling  a  town  meeting, 
but  their  opponents  issued  a  notice  of  a  public  meeting  to  be  held  at  the  New  State 
House  on  July  10.  The  resolutions,  pledging  support  to  the  measures  of  Admin- 
istration, were  framed  by  a  committee,  of  which  Barnabas  Bidwell  was  chairman. 
Next  to  his  name  came  that  of  John  Quincy  Adams,  the  only  federalist  of  reputation 
present  at  the  meeting.  The  federalists  recognizing  their  error,  joined  in  a  town 
meeting,  held  in  Faneuil  Hall,  on  July  16;  the  occasion  being  the  letter  from  the 
citizens  of  Norfolk,  describing  the  situation  in  Virginia.  A  committee  was  named  to 
prepare  the  resolutions,  and  John  Quincy  Adams  was  chairman.  With  him  were 
associated  Harrison  Gray  Otis,  William  Eustis,  Christopher  Gore  (who  was  not 
present  and  did  not  participate  in  the  meeting),  Dr.  Charles  Jarvis,  John  C.  Jones, 
Thomas  H.  Perkins,  and  Dr.  John  Warren.  The  resolutions,  drafted  by  Adams, 
and  unanimously  adopted  by  the  meeting,  received  the  approval  of  all  citizens, 
irrespective  of  party.  Adams,  Memoirs,  July  10,  16,  1807.  New  England  Federal- 
ism, 184. 

2  Dated  July  2, 1807. 


162  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1807 

our  fellow  citizens  in  affording  effectual  support  to  such  measures, 
as  our  Government  may  further  adopt  in  the  present  crisis  of  our 
affairs. 

3.  Resolved,  That  we  remember  with  pride  and  pleasure,  the 
patriotic  and  spirited  conduct  of  the  citizens  of  Norfolk,  Ports- 
mouth, and  their  vicinities,  before  the  orders  of  Government  were 
known,  upon  this  momentous  occasion;  and  they  are  entitled  to  the 
thanks  and  approbation  of  their  fellow  citizens  throughout  the 
Union. 

4.  Resolved,  That  the  Selectmen  be  requested  to  return  a  suit- 
able answer  to  the  respectful   communication  from  our  fellow 
citizens  at  Norfolk,  with  the  proceedings  of  this  meeting. 

MOTIONS1 

October  28,  1807. 

That  so  much  of  the  President's  Message  as  relates  to  the  recent 
outrages  committed  by  British  armed  vessels  within  the  jurisdic- 
tion, and  in  the  waters  of  the  United  States,  and  to  the  Legislative 
provisions  which  may  be  expedient  as  resulting  from  them,  be 
referred  to  a  select  committee,  with  leave  to  report  by  bill  or  other- 
wise.2 

That  so  much  of  the  said  Message  as  relates  to  the  formation  of 
the  seamen  of  the  United  States  into  a  special  militia  for  the  pur- 
pose of  occasional  defence  of  the  harbors  against  sudden  attacks,  be 
referred  to  a  select  committee,  with  leave  to  report  by  bill  or  other- 
wise. 

1  Annals  of  Congress,  loth  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  I.  19. 

2  On  October  30  a  committee  was  appointed  composed  of  John  Quincy  Adams, 
Samuel  Smith,  John  Milledge,   Samuel  Latham  Mitchill,  and  Joseph  Anderson. 
The  committee  reported  a  bill,  November  24.     Ib.,  34. 


i8o7]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  163 

MOTION  ON  IMPRESSMENTS 

November  25,  1807. 

Resolved,  That  the  President  of  the  United  States  be  requested 
to  cause  to  be  laid  before  the  Senate  a  return  of  the  number  of 
American  seamen  impressed  or  detained  by  British  armed  vessels, 
whose  names  have  been  reported  to  the  Department  of  State  since 
the  last  statement  made  to  Congress;  mentioning  the  names  of  the 
persons  impressed,  the  time  and  place  of  their  impressment,  the 
names  of  the  ships,  and,  as  far  as  may  be  known,  of  the  officers  by 
whom  they  were  impressed,  together  with  any  material  facts  or 
circumstances  in  relation  to  the  same;  stating,  also,  the  whole 
number  of  seamen  impressed  since  the  commencement  of  the 
present  war,  what  number  of  the  persons  impressed,  according  to 
the  last  statement  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  has  since  been  restored, 
and  the  numbers  still  detained  by  the  British,  since  demand  of 
their  restoration  made;  with  the  reasons  assigned  for  their  deten- 
tion.1 

TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

WASHINGTON,  30  November,  1807. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

I  received  a  few  days  since  your  very  kind  letter  which  I 
am  ashamed  of  answering  by  a  few  lines,  but  by  some  acci- 
dent I  have  fallen  from  a  state  of  almost  total  idleness  into 
an  overwhelming  flood  of  business,  which  leaves  me  scarcely 
a  quarter  of  an  hour  of  the  day  or  of  the  night.  I  sent  you 
last  week  a  copy  of  a  volume  in  the  form  of  a  bill  which  I  re- 
ported upon  the  aggression  business,  and  which  is  now  under 
debate.  The  mere  scribe-work  of  its  compilation  (for  not 
much  of  it  is  my  own),  and  the  attendance  upon  a  large  com- 
mittee where  it  was  discussed  before  it  came  into  the  Senate, 

1  Annals  of  Congress,  loth  Cong.,  ist  Sess.,  I.  38. 


1 64  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1807 

have  already  employed  me  with  sufficient  industry.  But  on 
Friday  last  Mr.  John  Smith  of  Ohio  made  his  appearance 
here  and  was  going  to  take  his  seat.  A  resolution  for  a  com- 
mittee of  inquiry  whether  he  ought  not  to  be  expelled  was 
immediately  offered,  which  after  some  debate  was  substan- 
tially adopted.  A  committee  of  seven  was  raised,  of  which 
I  have  the  misfortune  to  be  chairman.1  I  did  not  introduce 
any  one  of  the  proposed  resolutions  and,  as  you  will  see  by 
the  printed  debates,  took  very  little  part  in  the  discussion. 
It  was  a  subject  which  of  all  others  I  was  desirous  of  avoid- 
ing, but  in  vain.  The  principles  and  facts  involved  in  this 
inquiry  are  of  a  compass  and  magnitude  at  which  I  hardly 
dare  to  look,  and  the  solicitude  to  discharge  my  duty  op- 
presses me  beyond  measure. 

I  remain  of  my  first  opinion  on  my  arrival  here.  The 
President's  policy  is  procrastination,  and  if  Great  Britain  does 
not  wage  complete  war  upon  us,  we  shall  end  with  doing 
nothing  this  session.  .  .  . 

TO  JOSEPH  HALL  2 

WASHINGTON,  December  n,  1807. 
•  •••••• 

The  ground  taken  by  our  government  on  the  subject  of 
the  attack  upon  the  Chesapeake  has  been  sanctioned  even 
by  the  British  ministry,  who  in  the  most  unqualified  manner 
have  disavowed  the  orders  of  Admiral  Berkeley,  have  dis- 
claimed in  the  most  pointed  terms  every  pretension  to  search 
a  national  ship  for  deserters;  and  have  declared  themselves 
willing  to  make  proper  reparation  for  the  aggression.  You 
know  that  I  was  as  averse  to  the  encouragement  or  enlist- 

1  Adams,  Memoirs,  November  27,  1807. 

2  From  the  Columbian  Centinel,  December  19,  1807. 


i8o7]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  165 

ment  of  deserters,  as  the  warmest  friend  to  the  British  navy 
could  possibly  be;  and  that  I  thought  our  government  ought 
to  keep  this  identical  outrage  entirely  separate  from  every  other 
topic  of  controversy.  This  opinion  I  still  retain;  and  if  the 
extraordinary  mission  from  England  should  be  accomplished 
on  principles  avowed  by  Mr.  Canning,  I  have  no  doubt  that 
war  between  the  two  nations  may  yet  be  avoided.  To  this  end  I 
would  contribute  every  possible  aid  to  soften  points  of  con- 
troversy which  can  be  left  open,  to  retreat  from  extremities 
which  can  be  shunned,  and  to  preserve  peace  where  I  can 
have  no  hope  left  that  the  parties  can  ever  meet  upon  terms 
of  amity. 

With  respect  to  the  non-importation  act,  I  wish  you  to 
understand  that  it  is  no  favorite  of  mine.  I  have  to  some 
urged  its  immediate  repeal;  not  with  a  view  to  any  effect 
which  it  can  produce  upon  Great  Britain;  but  with  reference 
to  its  probable  effect  among  ourselves.  It  had  my  approba- 
tion two  years  ago,  because  the  merchants  throughout  the 
Union  called  upon  Congress  for  some  measure  to  aid  nego- 
tiation with  England;  and  because  the  administration,  and  a 
great  portion  of  our  people,  had  a  confidence  in  its  efficacy, 
which  could  only  be  tested  by  experience.  The  experiment 
has  been  made.  Whatever  good  effect  it  could  produce  it 
seems  to  me  is  past.  It  is  too  much,  or  too  little,  for  the 
present  state  of  things;  and  its  effects  will  distress  our  own 
people,  without  producing  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  in- 
tended beyond  the  Atlantic.  I  believe  the  administration, 
for  their  own  sakes,  ought  to  give  it  up.  But  so  long  as  the 
executive,  the  responsible  department,  believes  that  this 
measure  will  help  and  not  hinder  them  in  negotiation,  I 
think  its  repeal  ought  not  to  be  pressed  by  its  opponents  in 
Congress.  Your  petition,  as  I  presume  it  will  be,  if  couched 
in  respectful  terms,  without  tincture  of  party  spirit,  I  have 


1 66  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1807 

no  doubt  will  be  treated  with  due  consideration;  and  may 
perhaps  be  acceptable  to  the  government,  as  furnishing  an 
apology  for  abandoning  what  I  believe  they  do  not  rely  upon 
with  much  confidence.  There  is  a  bill  now  before  the  House 
to  modify  the  act,  and  I  suppose  any  modification  for  which 
you  ask,  may  be  introduced  into  it,  if  they  should  be  thought 
just.  .  .  . 

TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

WASHINGTON,  27  December,  1807. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

Your  favor  of  the  I4th  instant  came  to  my  hands  just  at  a 
moment  to  renew  and  to  strengthen  impressions  which  had 
been  weighing  heavily  upon  my  mind  for  near  a  month.  The 
general  questions  relating  to  the  powers  and  processes  of 
expulsion  under  our  Constitution  had  been  forced  upon  me 
by  the  situation  in  which  I  was  placed  as  chairman  of  the 
committee  on  the  present  inquiry.  My  own  inclinations 
would  have  led  me  to  investigations  of  a  different  kind,  for 
which  indeed  I  was  making  preparations  and  collecting  ma- 
terials. This  subject  however  came  on  quite  unexpectedly, 
and  still  more  unexpectedly  was  it  made  my  duty  to  take  the 
principal  labor  of  its  management  upon  myself.  The  com- 
mittee have  been  in  session  almost  every  day,  Saturday  and 
Christmas  day  not  excepted,  since  their  appointment.  Their 
report  is  now  ready  and  will  be  presented  in  the  course  of  a 
very  few  days.  It  is  long,  and  has  been  agreed  to  by  the 
committee  almost  to  a  line  as  drafted  by  myself.  It  will 
probably  form  a  subject  of  animated  discussion  on  the  ques- 
tion of  acceptance  and,  if  printed,  I  shall  immediately  send 
you  a  copy.  If  its  principles  should  not  meet  your  approba- 
tion, it  will  be  a  subject  of  the  deepest  regret  to  me.  But 


i8o7]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  167 

even  then,  I  think  you  will  find  in  it  internal  evidence  that 
its  errors,  if  such  you  should  deem  them,  have  not  arisen 
from  carelessness  or  inattention.  That  they  should  have  pro- 
ceeded from  any  less  excusable  origin  I  am  sure  you  will  not 
suspect. 

I  perceive,  by  the  newspapers  and  by  letters  from  more 
than  one  of  my  friends,  that  the  bill  which  has  here  com- 
monly been  termed  the  aggression  bill,  and  which  was  also 
reported  by  me  as  chairman  of  the  committee,  has  excited 
surmises  and  occasioned  imputations  among  my  federal 
friends  not  very  auspicious  to  their  good  opinion  of  me.  I 
think  that  when  I  inclosed  you  a  copy  of  the  bill  I  informed 
you  that  scarcely  any  of  its  provisions  were  mine,  although 
I  gave  the  bill  as  it  passed  the  Senate  my  vote  and  my  sup- 
port. I  know  not  anything  that  has  given  me  so  much  pleas- 
ure as  to  have  learnt  by  a  letter  from  Dr.  Waterhouse  that 
you  approved  its  principles.  I  have,  however,  inferred  from 
your  silence  respecting  it  and  from  some  other  circumstances, 
that  you  supposed  it  a  measure  too  high-toned  for  our  situa- 
tion and  perhaps  hazardous  to  our  peace.  That  may  pos- 
sibly be.  It  passed  by  a  vote  almost  unanimous  in  Senate, 
but  has  not  finally  been  acted  upon  in  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives. It  may,  therefore,  be  considered  as  indicative 
of  the  tone  of  sentiment  in  the  Senate  particularly  with  re- 
gard to  the  affair  of  the  Chesapeake,  and  to  the  support  of  our 
own  authority  within  our  own  jurisdiction.  That  I  have 
contributed  to  the  best  of  my  abilities,  and  as  far  as  my  very 
slender  influence  in  that  body  extended,  to  pledge  them  by 
this  bill  to  the  assertion  and  support  of  its  principles,  I  can 
never  deny.  But  I  had  evidence  too  clearly  irrefragable  of 
the  temper  prevailing  through  both  branches  of  Congress  to 
fear,  that  any  measure  which  might  unnecessarily  endanger 
the  peace  of  the  nation  would  be  over  hastily  adopted. 


1 68  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1807 

Our  prospects  have  indeed  been  growing  more  gloomy 
from  day  to  day.  And  we  have  now,  at  the  express  call  of 
the  President,  an  unlimited  embargo.  To  this  measure,  also, 
as  merely  precautionary  and  defensive,  I  gave  my  assent 
and  vote.  It  was  in  Senate  carried  through  in  one  day,  but 
was  contested  with  much  more  violence  in  the  other  House.1 
Under  the  decrees  of  France  and  Great  Britain  dooming  to 
capture  and  confiscation  all  our  ships  and  cargoes  trading 
with  either  of  those  powers,  we  had  no  other  alternative  left 
but  this,  or  taking  our  side  at  once  in  the  war.  I  do  not  be- 
lieve indeed  that  the  embargo  can  long  be  continued;  but  if 
we  let  our  ships  go  out  without  arming  them  and  authorizing 
them  to  resist  the  decrees,  they  must  go  merely  to  swell  the 
plunder  of  the  contending  parties.2 

1  On  December  18  a  message  from  the  President  was  read  in  the  Senate  calling 
attention  to  the  increasing  dangers  to  American  vessels,  seamen  and  merchandise, 
threatened  on  the  high  seas  and  elsewhere,  by  the  belligerent  powers  of  Europe.    A 
committee  was  at  once  appointed,  composed  of  Samuel  Smith,  John  Quincy  Adams, 
Joseph  Anderson,  Stephen  R.  Bradley,  and  Andrew  Gregg;  which  reported  on  the 
same  day  an  embargo  on  all  ships  and  vessels  in  the  ports  and  harbors  of  the  United 
States.    The  bill  was,  by  a  suspension  of  the  rules,  given  a  second  reading  on  that 
day,  and  was  then  passed  by  a  vote  of  twenty-two  to  six,  Adams  voting  in  the 
affirmative.    Annals  of  Congress,  loth  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  I.  50.     See  Henry  Adams, 
History,  IV.  153;  American  State  Papers,  Foreign  Relations,  III.  25. 

2  "When  the  committee  had  assembled,  we  had  some  doubts  of  the  propriety  of 
the  measure  [embargo].    Mr.  Adams,  in  particular,  was  with  difficulty,  brought  to 
consent  to  it.     General  [Samuel]  Smith  stated  the  reasons  which  influenced  the 
Executive,  and  when  the  committee  at  last  agreed  unanimously  to  recommend  the 
measure  to  the  Senate,  it  was  fully  understood  by  them  that  the  bill  should  pass  as 
soon  as  possible:  and  I  think  Gen.  Smith  was  instructed,  that  if  any  objections  were 
made,  he  should  move  that  the  rule  of  the  Senate  which  required  that  the  three 
readings  of  Bills  should  be  on  three  different  days,  be  suspended,  which  he  after- 
ward did. 

''The  reasons  which  influenced  the  committee  to  recommend  that  course  were, 
that,  if  the  bill  laying  an  embargo  were  to  be  eight  or  ten  days  in  passing  the  two 
Houses,  a  number  of  merchants  would  in  the  meantime  send  out  their  vessels  loaded 
with  provisions,  for  ten  or  twelve  months,  and  defeat  the  object  of  the  embargo. 


i So;]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  169 

The  British  proclamation,1  expressly  commanding  impress- 
ment from  our  merchant  vessels  and  assuming  in  fact  a 
right  of  annulling  our  laws  of  naturalization,  has  given  again 
a  new  and  darker  complexion  to  our  old  controversies  on  that 
subject.  We  ought  not  I  think  to  suffer  this  new  encroach- 
ment, and  yet  I  know  not  how  we  can  take  a  stand  against  it 
without  coming  to  immediate  war.  Mr.  Canning  in  his  cor- 
respondence with  Mr.  Monroe  has  insisted  very  strenuously 
upon  keeping  the  case  of  the  Chesapeake  distinct  from  all 
other  subjects  of  negotiation  between  us;  and  yet  the  proc- 
lamation itself  improperly  connects  them,  by  taking  occa- 
sion with  the  disclaimer  of  the  right  of  search  in  national 
ships  to  place  upon  new  ground  and  under  the  formal  tenor 
of  a  proclamation  the  pretension  to  impress  from  merchant 
vessels. 

There  are  some  important  lights  in  which  this  question  of 
impressment  has  not  yet  been  presented  to  the  people  of  this 
country.  You  have  seen  the  resolution  which  I  offered  in 
Senate  some  weeks  since,  to  request  from  the  President  in- 
formation as  to  the  impressments  within  the  two  last  years. 
The  returns  have  not  yet  been  made.2 

If  it  would  not  be  too  troublesome  to  you  I  would  intreat 

And  as  they  would  make  great  profits,  those  that  might  be  taken  by  the  embargo 
would  feel  themselves  much  injured,  and  become  hostile  to  the  government.  It  is 
injurious  that  Mr.  Pickering  should  attach  so  much  wrong  to  Mr.  Adams,  as  I  am 
confident  that  some  other  members  of  the  committee  pressed  the  passing  of  the 
act,  in  the  manner  related,  in  as  strong  terms  as  Mr.  Adams.  He  might  as  well 
have  censured  the  whole  Senate,  except  Mr.  Pickering,  Mr.  Crawford  and  four  or 
five  others  who  opposed  the  bill:  ...  I  further  well  recollect,  that  as  we  passed 
from  the  committee  room  to  the  Senate,  Mr.  Adams  observed  to  me:  'This  measure 
will  cost  you  and  me  our  seats,  but  private  interest  must  not  be  put  in  opposition 
to  public  good.'"  Letter  of  Stephen  Row  Bradley,  September  21,  1824. 

1  October  16,  1807.    American  State  Papers,  Foreign  Relations,  III.  25. 

2  Resolution  of  the  Senate,  November  30,  1807.    The  return  was  made  March  2, 
1808,  and  is  in  American  State  Papers,  Foreign  Relations,  III.  36. 


170  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1807 

you  to  send  me  an  account,  as  minute  and  particular  as  your 
recollection  will  admit,  of  the  case  of  the  man  whom  you  de- 
fended for  killing  Lieutenant  Panton.1  If  you  have  any 
minutes  of  the  trial,  or  any  means  of  reference  to  your  argu- 
ment, the  authorities  you  adduced,  and  the  opinion  of  the 
court,  they  might  be  of  service  to  me.2  I  think  I  have  heard 
you  say  that  in  that  case  it  was  admitted  by  that  decision, 
that  the  practice  of  impressment  was  even  then  held  to  be 
inadmissible  in  the  colonies. 

I  would  also  thank  you  for  your  opinion  on  the  following 
points.  Is  not  the  impressment  of  a  native  born  American 
citizen  from  an  American  vessel  in  point  of  principle  pre- 
cisely the  same  thing,  as  if  a  British  recruiting  officer  from 
Canada  should  come  within  our  lines  and  forcibly  take  away 
a  man  to  make  him  a  British  soldier?  And  is  not  this  forcible 
levying  of  recruits  by  the  officer  of  one  nation  within  the 
jurisdiction  of  another  the  offence  against  the  laws  of  nations 
known  by  the  name  of  plagiat  or  man-stealing?  And  is  not 
that  offence  by  the  universal  usage  of  civilized  nations 
punished  with  death? 

Is  there  any  law  or  usage  of  nations  which  forbids  an  Amer- 
ican merchant  or  master  of  a  vessel  from  engaging  by  con- 
tract a  foreign  seaman  to  serve  him  as  a  sailor  upon  a  lawful 
voyage  ? 

Is  not  every  seaman  thus  engaged  by  signing  a  shipping 
paper  according  to  law?  And  is  not  the  personal  service  of  a 
seaman  thus  engaged  a  debt  ? 

I  put  the  case  of  deserting  from  ships  of  war,  or  any  other 
vessel,  out  of  the  question;  but  setting  that  aside,  if  the 
personal  service  of  a  British  seaman  has  become  by  contract  a 
debt  to  an  American  merchant,  and  if  a  British  officer  is 

1  Michael  Corbet,  who  killed  Henry  Gibson  Panton,  of  the  Rose  frigate. 

2  The  notes  are  printed  in  Mass.  Hist.  Soc.  Proceedings,  XLIV.  429. 


i8o7]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  171 

warranted  and  ordered  by  his  government  forcibly  to  take 
the  seaman  away  from  the  service  to  which  he  is  bound,  is  it 
not  in  principle  an  undertaking  by  the  British  government 
to  cancel  a  debt  due  by  the  individual  of  one  nation  to  the 
individual  of  the  other,  and  as  such  in  substance  a  direct 
violation  of  the  tenth  article  of  Mr.  Jay's  treaty? 

Perhaps  these  last  questions  may  at  first  blush  carry  an 
appearance  of  refinement  in  their  train  of  reasoning  more 
than  they  really  deserve.  I  will  thank  you  to  weigh  delib- 
erately the  nature  of  the  contract  between  seamen  and  their 
owners,  and  the  moral  reason  professedly  assigned  in  the 
tenth  article  of  the  treaty  for  placing  contracts  between  in- 
dividuals even  beyond  the  reach  of  war,  and  say  whether  the 
forcible  dissolution  of  contract,  which  must  be  involved  in 
every  case  of  impressment,  does  not  violate  the  substance  if 
not  the  form  of  that  article? 1 

These  are  not  the  only  subjects  of  public  concern  upon 
which  I  feel  the  want  of  your  judgment  and  advice.  My 
situation  here  at  this  moment  is  singular  and  critical.  My 
views  of  present  policy,  and  my  sense  of  the  course  en- 
joined upon  me  by  public  duty,  are  so  different  from  those  of 
the  federalists  that  I  find  myself  in  constant  opposition  to 
them.  Yet  I  have  no  communication  with  the  administra- 
tion but  that  which  my  place  in  the  Senate  of  course  implies.2 
The  friends  of  the  Executive  in  Senate  repose  little  confidence 

1  The  reply  of  John  Adams  is  printed  in  Mass.  Hist.  Soc.  Proceedings,  XLIV.  422. 

2  "You  say,  you  are  not  in  the  confidence  of  the  Executive.    I  yield  implicit  faith 
to  the  declaration,  because  you  announce  it,  and  because  I  know  you  are  incapable 
of  being  the  creature  of  any  administration,  or  the  advocate  for  any  other  measures, 
but  those  which  your  judgment  approves.    But  were  I  to  give  credence  to  the  decla- 
rations of  zealous  federalists  in  Massachusetts,  as  well  as  in  this  State,  I  should  con- 
sider your  conduct  in  direct  opposition  to  what  I  now  do,  and  ever  have,  since  I 
have  had  the  pleasure  of  knowing  you."      William  Plumer  to  John  Quincy  Adams, 
February  12,  1808.     Ms. 


I72  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1807 

in  me,  and  discover  occasionally  unequivocal  marks  of  their 
distrust  and  suspicion.  Even  when  concurring  in  my  opin- 
ions, some  of  them  betray  an  involuntary  anxiety  lest  their 
popularity  should  be  affected  by  having  their  names  go  out 
as  supporters  of  measures  linked  with  mine.  This  temper 
does,  indeed,  appear  in  some  small  degree  to  be  wearing  off, 
but  any  trifle  light  as  air  would  restore  it  in  all  its  vigor.  Yet 
since  the  commencement  of  the  present  session  I  have  been 
placed  upon  every  committee  of  national  importance,  and 
made  the  reporter  of  several.  Without  having  the  weight  of 
a  single  vote  besides  my  own  in  point  of  personal  influence,  I 
find  myself  charged  with  the  duty  of  originating  and  con- 
ducting measures  of  the  highest  interest.  I  am  made  a  leader 
without  followers.  Until  the  present  session  I  have  always 
had  two  friends  (Tracy  and  Plumer)  with  whom  I  could 
consult  in  the  most  intimate  and  confidential  manner  and 
on  whose  friendship  I  could  always  rely,  almost  always  upon 
their  concurrence.  But  death  has  removed  one  of  them,1 
and  changes  of  political  party  the  other.  I  am  compelled, 
therefore,  to  lean  upon  my  own  judgment  more  than  it  will 
always  bear.  My  only  consolation  is  in  the  consciousness 
of  good  intentions  and  unwearied  attention  to  my  duty. 
Man  can  give  no  more,  the  rest  must  be  left  to  a  higher 
power.2 

Mr.  Monroe  is  here  and  has  been  received  with  great 
demonstrations  of  respect  and  affection  by  his  own  state. 
There  is  said  to  be  some  electioneering  on  foot,  of  which  he 
is  one  of  the  objects.  Electioneering,  indeed,  is  reported  to 

1  Uriah  Tracy  died  at  Washington,  D.  C,  July  19,  1807. 

2  "Dana  and  Goodrich,  of  Connecticut,  are  the  only  men  who  agree  with  me  con- 
cerning the  course  of  John  Quincy  Adams.    His  deviation  from  his  friends  is  per- 
fectly reconcilable  with  the  peculiar  texture  of  his  mind,  without  resorting  to  any 
suspicion  of  his  political  integrity.    I  neither  join  in,  nor  sanction,  any  asperities 
about  him."    Josiah  Quincy  to  his  wife,  Life,  124. 


i8o7]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  173 

be  very  active,  but  I  know  nothing  of  its  course  of  proceed- 
ings.1 

•  •••••• 

P.  S.  I  hear  there  is  a  private  correspondence  now  passing 
between  General  Wilkinson  and  J.  Randolph,  which  is  ex- 
pected to  terminate  in  a  meeting  of  honor.2 

REPORT  ON  SENATOR  JOHN  SMITH  3 

The  committee  appointed  to  inquire  whether  it  be  compatible 
with  the  honor  and  privileges  of  the  house  that  John  Smith  a 
Senator  from  the  State  of  Ohio  against  whom  bills  of  indictment 
were  found  at  the  Circuit  Court  of  Virginia  held  at  Richmond  in 
August  last  for  treason  and  misdemeanor  should  be  permitted  any 
longer  to  have  a  seat  therein  and  to  inquire  into  all  the  facts  re- 
garding the  conduct  of  Mr.  Smith  as  an  alleged  associate  of  Aaron 
Burr  and  report  the  same  to  the  Senate  submit  the  following  re- 
port: 

Your  committee  are  of  opinion,  that  the  conspiracy  of  Aaron 
Burr  and  his  associates  against  the  peace,  union,  and  liberties  of 
these  states,  is  of  such  a  character,  and  that  its  existence  is  estab- 
lished by  such  a  mass  of  concurring  and  mutually  corroborative 
testimony,  that  it  is  incompatible  not  only  with  the  honor  and 
privileges  of  this  House,  but  with  the  deepest  interests  of  this  na- 
tion, that  any  person  engaged  in  it  should  be  permitted  to  hold  a 
seat  in  the  Senate  of  the  United  States. 

Whether  the  facts,  of  which  the  committee  submit  herewith 
such  evidence  as,  under  the  order  of  the  Senate,  they  have  been 
able  to  collect,  are  sufficient  to  substantiate  the  participation  of 

1  Monroe  had  taken  leave  of  the  King  October  7,  and  reached  Washington,  De- 
cember 22,  to  oppose  the  choice  of  Madison  for  the  succession  to  Jefferson. 

2  Adams,  Memoirs,  December,  28,  31,  1807. 

3  Also  printed  in  Annals  of  Congress,  loth  Cong.,  ist  Sess.,  I.  56.    The  debate 
upon  the  report,  with  remarks  by  Adams,  is  in  the  same  volume,  66,  passim,  his 
final  speech  being  made  April  8. 


i74  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1807 

Mr.  Smith  in  that  conspiracy,  or  not,  will  remain  for  the  Senate  to 
decide. 

The  committee  submit  also  to  the  consideration  of  the  Senate, 
the  correspondence  between  Mr.  Smith  and  them,  through  their 
chairman,  in  the  course  of  their  meetings.  The  committee  have 
never  conceived  themselves  invested  with  authority  to  try  Mr. 
Smith.  Their  charge  was  to  report  an  opinion  relating  to  the  honor 
and  privileges  of  the  Senate,  and  the  facts  relating  to  the  conduct 
of  Mr.  Smith.  Their  opinion,  indeed,  cannot  be  expressed  in  re- 
lation to  the  privilege  of  the  Senate,  without  relating,  at  the  same 
time,  to  Mr.  Smith's  right  of  holding  a  seat  in  this  body;  but,  in 
that  respect,  the  authority  of  the  committee  extends  only  to  pro- 
posal, and  not  to  decision.  But  as  he  manifested  a  great  solicitude 
to  be  heard  before  them,  they  obtained  permission  from  the  Senate 
to  admit  his  attendance,  communicated  to  him  the  evidence  in  their 
possession,  by  which  he  was  inculpated,  furnished  him,  in  writing, 
with  the  questions  arising  from  it,  which  appeared  to  them  mate- 
rial, and  received  from  him  the  information  and  explanations  here- 
with submitted  as  part  of  the  facts  reported.  But  Mr.  Smith  has 
claimed,  as  a  right,  to  be  heard  in  his  defence  by  counsel,  to  have 
compulsory  process  for  witnesses,  and  to  be  confronted  with  his 
accusers,  as  if  the  committee  had  been  a  circuit  court  of  the  United 
States.  But  it  is  before  the  Senate  itself  that  your  committee 
conceived  it  just  and  proper  that  Mr.  Smith's  defence  of  himself 
should  be  heard.  Nor  have  they  conceived  themselves  bound  in 
this  inquiry  by  any  other  rules  than  those  of  natural  justice  and 
equity,  due  to  a  brother  Senator  on  the  one  part,  and  to  their 
countrymen  on  the  other. 

Mr.  Smith  represents  himself,  on  this  inquiry,  as  solitary,  friend- 
less, and  unskilled,  contending  for  rights  which  he  intimates  are 
denied  him;  and  the  defender  of  senatorial  privileges  which  he 
seems  apprehensive  will  be  refused  him  by  Senators,  liable,  so 
long  as  they  hold  their  offices,  to  have  his  case  made  their  own. 
The  committee  are  not  unaware  that,  in  the  vicissitudes  of  human 
events,  no  member  of  this  body  can  be  sure  that  his  conduct  will 


1 8o7l  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  175 

never  be  made  a  subject  of  inquiry  and  decision  before  the  assem- 
bly to  which  he  belongs.  They  are  aware  that,  in  the  course  of 
proceeding  which  the  Senate  may  now  sanction,  its  members  are 
marking  out  a  precedent  which  may  hereafter  apply  to  themselves. 
They  are  sensible  that  the  principles  upon  which  they  have  acted 
ought  to  have  the  same  operation  upon  their  own  claims  to  privi- 
lege as  upon  those  of  Mr.  Smith;  the  same  relation  to  the  rights  of 
their  constituents,  which  they  have  to  those  of  the  legislature  which 
he  represents.  They  have  deemed  it  their  duty  to  advance  in  the 
progress  of  their  inquiry  with  peculiar  care  and  deliberation.  They 
have  dealt  out  to  Mr.  Smith  that  measure,  which,  under  the  sup- 
position of  similar  circumstances,  they  would  be  content  to  find 
imparted  to  themselves;  and  they  have  no  hesitation  in  declaring 
that,  under  such  imputations,  colored  by  such  evidence,  they 
should  hold  it  a  sacred  obligation  to  themselves,  to  their  fellow 
Senators,  and  to  their  country,  to  meet  them  by  direct,  uncondi- 
tional acknowledgment  or  denial,  without  seeking  a  refuge  from 
the  broad  face  of  day  in  the  labyrinth  of  technical  forms. 

In  examining  the  question  whether  these  forms  of  judicial  pro- 
ceedings, or  the  rules  of  judicial  evidence,  ought  to  be  applied  to 
the  exercise  of  that  censorial  authority  which  the  Senate  of  the 
United  States  possesses  over  the  conduct  of  its  members,  let  us 
assume,  as  the  test  of  their  application,  either  the  dictates  of  un- 
fettered reason,  the  letter  and  spirit  of  the  Constitution,  or  prece- 
dents, domestic  or  foreign,  and  your  committee  believe  that  the 
result  will  be  the  same;  that  the  power  of  expelling  a  member  must, 
in  its  nature,  be  discretionary,  and  in  its  exercise  always  more 
summary  than  the  tardy  process  of  judicial  tribunals. 

The  power  of  expelling  a  member  for  misconduct  results,  on  the 
principles  of  common  sense,  from  the  interest  of  the  nation,  that 
the  high  trust  of  legislation  should  be  invested  in  pure  hands. 
When  the  trust  is  elective,  it  is  not  to  be  presumed  that  the  con- 
stituent body  will  commit  the  deposits  to  the  keeping  of  worthless 
characters.  But  when  a  man,  whom  his  fellow-citizens  have 
honored  with  their  confidence,  on  the  pledge  of  a  spotless  reputa- 


i76  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1807 

tion,  has  degraded  himself  by  the  commission  of  infamous  crimes, 
which  become  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  revealed  to  the  world, 
defective  indeed  would  be  that  institution  which  should  be  im- 
potent to  discard  from  its  bosom  the  contagion  of  such  a  member; 
which  should  have  no  remedy  of  amputation  to  apply  until  the 
poison  had  reached  the  heart. 

The  question  upon  the  trial  of  a  criminal  cause,  before  the  courts 
of  common  law,  is  not  between  guilt  and  innocence,  but  between 
guilt  and  the  possibility  of  innocence.  If  a  doubt  can  possibly  be 
raised,  either  by  the  ingenuity  of  the  party  or  of  his  counsel,  or 
by  the  operation  of  general  rules  in  their  unforeseen  application  to 
particular  cases,  that  doubt  must  be  decisive  for  acquittal,  and  the 
verdict  of  not  guilty,  perhaps,  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  means  no 
more  than  that  the  guilt  of  the  party  has  not  been  demonstrated 
in  the  precise,  specific,  and  narrow  forms  prescribed  by  law.  The 
humane  spirit  of  the  laws  multiplies  the  barriers  for  the  protection 
of  innocence,  and  freely  admits  that  these  barriers  may  be  abused 
for  the  shelter  of  guilt.  It  avows  a  strong  partiality  favorable  to 
the  person  upon  trial,  and  acknowledges  the  preference  that  ten 
guilty  should  escape  rather  than  that  one  innocent  should  suffer. 
The  interest  of  the  public  that  a  particular  crime  should  be  pun- 
ished, is  but  as  one  to  ten,  compared  with  the  interest  of  the  party, 
that  innocence  should  be  spared.  Acquittal  only  restores  the  party 
to  the  common  rights  of  every  other  citizen;  it  restores  him  to  no 
public  trust;  it  invests  him  with  no  public  confidence;  it  substitutes 
the  sentence  of  mercy  for  the  doom  of  justice;  and  to  the  eyes  of 
impartial  reason,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases,  must  be  considered 
rather  as  a  pardon  than  a  justification. 

But  when  a  member  of  a  legislative  body  lies  under  the  imputa- 
tion of  aggravated  offences,  and  the  determination  upon  his  cause 
can  operate  only  to  remove  him  from  a  station  of  extensive  powers, 
and  important  trust,  this  disproportion  between  the  interest  of  the 
public  and  the  interest  of  the  individual  disappears;  if  any  dispro- 
portion exists,  it  is  of  an  opposite  kind.  It  is  not  better  than  ten 
traitors  should  be  members  of  this  Senate  than  that  one  innocent 


i8o7]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  177 

man  should  suffer  expulsion.  In  either  case,  no  doubt,  the  evil 
would  be  great.  But  in  the  former,  it  would  strike  at  the  vitals 
of  the  nation;  in  the  latter  it  might,  though  deeply  to  be  lamented, 
only  be  the  calamity  of  an  individual. 

By  the  letter  of  the  Constitution,  the  power  of  expelling  a  mem- 
ber is  given  to  each  of  the  two  Houses  of  Congress,  without  any 
limitation  other  than  that  which  requires  a  concurrence  of  two- 
thirds  of  the  votes  to  give  it  effect. 

The  spirit  of  the  Constitution  is,  perhaps,  in  no  respect  more 
remarkable  than  in  the  solicitude  which  it  has  manifested  to  secure 
the  purity  of  the  legislature  by  that  of  the  elements  of  its  composi- 
tion. A  qualification  of  age  is  made  necessary  for  the  members 
to  ensure  the  maturity  of  their  judgment;  a  qualification  of  long 
citizenship,  to  ensure  a  community  of  interests  and  affections  be- 
tween them  and  their  country;  a  qualification  of  residence,  to 
provide  a  sympathy  between  every  member  and  the  portion  of  the 
Union  from  which  he  is  delegated;  and  to  guard,  as  far  as  regulation 
can  guard,  against  every  bias  of  personal  interest,  and  every  hazard 
of  interfering  duties,  it  has  made  every  member  of  Congress  in- 
eligible to  office  which  he  contributed  to  create,  and  every  officer  of 
the  Union  incapable  of  holding  a  seat  in  Congress.  Yet,  in  the 
midst  of  all  this  anxious  providence  of  legislative  virtue,  it  has  not 
authorized  the  constituent  body  to  recall  in  any  case  its  representa- 
tive. It  has  not  subjected  him  to  removal  by  impeachment;  and 
when  the  darling  of  the  people's  choice  has  become  their  deadliest 
foe,  can  it  enter  the  imagination  of  a  reasonable  man  that  the 
sanctuary  of  their  legislation  must  remain  polluted  with  his 
presence,  until  a  court  of  common  law,  with  its  pace  of  snail,  can 
ascertain  whether  his  crime  was  committed  on  the  right  or  on  the 
left  bank  of  a  river;  whether  a  puncture  of  difference  can  be  found 
between  the  words  of  the  charge  and  the  words  of  the  proof; 
whether  the  witnesses  of  his  guilt  should  or  should  not  be  heard  by 
his  jury;  and  whether  he  was  punishable,  because  present  at  an 
overt  act,  or  intangible  to  public  justice,  because  he  only  contrived 
and  prepared  it?  Is  it  conceivable  that  a  traitor  to  that  country 


1 78  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1807 

which  has  loaded  him  with  favors,  guilty  to  the  common  under- 
standing of  all  mankind,  should  be  suffered  to  return  unquestioned 
to  that  post  of  honor  and  confidence,  where,  in  the  zenith  of  his 
good  fame,  he  had  been  placed  by  the  esteem  of  his  countrymen, 
and  in  defiance  of  their  wishes,  in  mockery  of  their  fears,  sur- 
rounded by  the  public  indignation,  but  inaccessible  to  its  bolt, 
pursue  the  purposes  of  treason  in  the  heart  of  the  national  coun- 
cils? Must  the  assembled  rulers  of  the  land  listen  with  calmness 
and  indifference,  session  after  session,  to  the  voice  of  notorious 
infamy,  until  the  sluggard  step  of  municipal  justice  can  overtake 
his  enormities?  Must  they  tamely  see  the  lives  and  fortunes  of 
millions,  the  safety  of  present  and  future  ages,  depending  upon  his 
vote,  recorded  with  theirs,  merely  because  the  abused  benignity 
of  general  maxims  may  have  remitted  to  him  the  forfeiture  of  his 
life? 

Such,  in  very  supposable  cases,  would  be  the  unavoidable  con- 
sequences of  a  principle  which  should  offer  the  crutches  of  judicial 
tribunals  as  an  apology  for  crippling  the  congressional  power  of 
expulsion.  Far  different,  in  the  opinion  of  your  committee,  is  the 
spirit  of  our  Constitution.  They  believe  that  the  very  purpose  for 
which  this  power  was  given  was  to  preserve  the  legislature  from 
the  first  approaches  of  infection.  That  it  was  made  discretionary 
because  it  could  not  exist  under  the  procrastination  of  general 
rules;  that  its  process  must  be  summary,  because  it  would  be  ren- 
dered nugatory  by  delay. 

Passing  from  the  constitutional  view  of  the  subject  to  that 
which  is  afforded  by  the  authority  of  precedent,  your  committee 
find  that,  since  the  establishment  of  our  present  National  legis- 
lature, there  has  been  but  one  example  of  expulsion  from  the  Sen- 
ate. In  that  case,  the  member  implicated  was  called  upon,  in  the 
first  instance,  to  answer  whether  he  was  the  author  of  a  letter,  the 
copy  of  which  only  was  produced,  and  the  writing  of  which  was 
the  cause  of  his  expulsion.  He  was  afterwards  requested  to  declare 
whether  he  was  the  author  of  the  letter  itself,  and  declining,  in 
both  cases,  to  answer,  the  fact  of  his  having  written  it  was  estab- 


i8o7]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  179 

lished  by  a  comparison  of  his  hand-writing,  and  by  the  belief  of 
persons  who  had  seen  him  write,  upon  the  inspection  of  the  letter. 
In  all  those  points  the  committee  perceive  the  admission  of  a 
species  of  evidence,  which,  in  courts  of  criminal  jurisdiction,  would 
be  excluded,  and,  in  the  Resolution  of  expulsion,  the  Senate  de- 
clared the  person  inculpated  guilty  of  a  high  misdemeanor,  although 
no  presentment  or  indictment  had  been  found  against  him,  and  no 
prosecution  at  law  was  ever  commenced  upon  the  case. 

This  event  occurred  in  July,  1797.  About  fifteen  months  before 
that  time,  upon  an  application  from  the  legislature  of  Kentucky, 
requesting  an  investigation  by  the  Senate  of  a  charge  against  one 
of  the  members  from  that  State,  of  perjury,  which  had  been  made 
in  certain  newspaper  publications,  but  for  which  no  prosecution 
had  been  commenced,  the  Senate  did  adopt,  by  a  majority  of  six- 
teen votes  to  eight,  the  report  of  a  committee,  purporting  that  the 
Senate  had  no  jurisdiction  to  try  the  charge,  and  that  the  memorial 
of  the  Kentucky  legislature  should  be  dismissed.  There  were, 
indeed,  very  sufficient  reasons  of  a  different  kind  assigned  in  the 
same  report,  for  not  pursuing  the  investigation,  in  that  partic- 
ular case,  any  further;  and  your  committee  believe  that,  in  the 
reasoning  of  that  report,  some  principles  were  assumed  and  some 
inferences  drawn,  which  were  altogether  unnecessary  for  the  deter- 
mination of  that  case,  which  were  adopted  without  a  full  consider- 
ation of  all  their  consequences,  and  the  inaccuracy  of  which  was 
clearly  proved  by  the  departure  from  them  in  the  instance  which 
was  so  soon  afterwards  to  take  place.  It  was  the  first  time  that  a 
question  of  expulsion  had  ever  been  agitated  in  Congress,  since 
the  adoption  of  the  Constitution.  And  the  subject  being  thus  en- 
tirely new,  was  considered  perhaps  too  much  with  reference  to  the 
particular  circumstances  of  the  moment,  and  not  enough  upon  the 
numerous  contingencies  to  which  the  general  question  might 
apply.  Your  committee  state  this  opinion  with  some  confidence, 
because  of  the  sixteen  Senators  who,  in  March,  1796,  voted  for  the 
report  dismissing  the  memorial  of  the  Kentucky  legislature;  eleven, 
on  the  subsequent  occasion,  in  July,  1797,  voted  also  for  that  re- 


180  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1807 

port,  which  concluded  with  a  resolution  for  the  expulsion  of  Mr. 
Blount.  The  other  five  were  no  longer  present  in  the  Senate.  Yet, 
if  the  principles  advanced  in  the  first  report  had  been  assumed  as 
the  ground  of  proceeding  at  the  latter  period,  the  Senate  would 
have  been  as  impotent  of  jurisdiction  upon  the  offence  of  Mr. 
Blount  as  they  had  supposed  themselves  upon  the  allegation  against 
Mr.  Marshall. 

Those  parts  of  the  fifth  and  sixth  articles,  amendatory  to  the 
Constitution,  upon  which  the  report  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Marshall 
appears  to  rely  for  taking  away  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Senate,  your 
Committee  suppose  can  only  be  understood  as  referring  to  prose- 
cutions at  law;  to  suppose  that  they  were  intended  as  restrictions 
upon  powers  expressly  granted  by  the  Constitution  to  the  legisla- 
ture, or  either  of  its  branches,  would  in  a  manner  annihilate  the 
power  of  impeachment  as  well  as  that  of  expulsion.  It  would  lead 
to  the  absurd  conclusion  that  the  authority  given  for  the  purpose 
of  removing  iniquity  from  the  seats  of  power,  should  be  denied  its 
exercise  in  precisely  those  cases  which  most  loudly  call  for  its  en- 
ergies. It  would  present  the  singular  spectacle  of  a  legislature 
vested  with  power  of  expelling  its  members,  of  impeaching,  remov- 
ing, and  disqualifying  public  officers,  for  trivial  transgressions  be- 
neath the  cognizance  of  the  law,  yet  forbidden  to  exert  them  against 
capital  or  infamous  crimes. 

Those  two  articles  were  in  substance  borrowed  from  similar 
regulations  contained  in  that  justly  celebrated  statute,  which  for 
so  many  ages  has  been  distinguished  by  the  name  of  the  Great 
Charter  of  England.  Yet  in  that  country,  where  they  are  recog- 
nized as  the  most  solid  foundations  of  the  liberties  of  the  nation, 
they  have  never  been  considered  as  interfering  with  the  power  of 
expelling  a  member,  exercised  at  all  times  by  the  House  of  Com- 
mons; a  power  which  there,  however,  rests  only  upon  parliamentary 
usage,  and  has  never  been  bestowed,  as  in  the  Constitution  of  the 
United  States,  by  any  act  of  supreme  legislation.  From  a  number 
of  precedents  which  have  been  consulted,  it  is  found  that  the  exer- 
cise of  this  authority  there  has  always  been  discretionary,  and  its 


i8o7]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  181 

process  always  far  otherwise  than  compendious  in  the  prosecutions 
before  the  judicial  courts.  So  far,  indeed,  have  they  been  from 
supposing  a  conviction  at  law  necessary  to  precede  a  vote  of  ex- 
pulsion, that,  in  one  instance,  a  resolution  to  demand  a  prosecution 
appears  immediately  after  the  adoption  of  the  resolution  to  expel. 
In  numerous  cases  the  member  submits  to  examination,  adduces 
evidence  in  his  favor  and  has  evidence  produced  against  him,  with 
or  without  formal  authentication;  and  the  discretion  of  the  House 
is  not  even  restricted  by  the  necessary  concurrence  of  more  than  a 
bare  majority  of  the  votes. 

The  provision  in  our  Constitution  which  forbids  the  expulsion 
of  a  member  by  an  ordinary  majority,  and  requires  for  this  act  of 
rigorous  and  painful  duty  the  assent  of  two-thirds,  your  committee 
consider  as  a  wise  and  sufficient  guard  against  the  possible  abuse 
of  this  legislative  discretion.  In  times  of  heat  and  violent  party 
spirit,  the  rights  of  the  minority  might  not  always  be  duly  re- 
spected, if  a  bare  majority  could  expel  their  members  under  no 
other  control  than  that  of  their  own  discretion.  The  operation  of 
this  rule  is  of  great  efficacy,  both  over  the  proceedings  of  the  whole 
body,  and  over  the  conduct  of  every  individual  member.  The 
times  when  the  most  violent  struggles  of  contending  parties  oc- 
cur —  when  the  conflict  of  opposite  passions  is  most  prone  to  ex- 
cess —  are  precisely  the  times  when  the  numbers  are  most  equally 
divided;  when  the  majority  amounts  to  the  proportion  of  two- 
thirds  the  security  in  its  own  strength  is  of  itself  a  guard  against 
extraordinary  stretches  of  power;  when  the  minority  dwindles  to 
the  proportion  of  one-third,  its  consciousness  of  weakness  dis- 
suades from  any  attempts  to  encroach  upon  the  rights  of  the 
majority,  which  might  provoke  retaliation.  But  if  expulsion  were 
admissible  only  as  a  sequel  to  the  issue  of  a  legal  prosecution,  or 
upon  the  same  principles  and  forms  of  testimony  which  are  estab- 
lished in  the  criminal  courts,  your  committee  can  see  no  possible 
reason  why  it  should  be  rendered  still  more  imbecile  by  the  req- 
uisition of  two-thirds  to  give  it  effect. 

It  is  now  the  duty  of  your  committee  to  apply  the  principles 


1 82  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1807 

which  they  have  here  endeavored  to  settle  and  elucidate,  to  the 
particular  case  upon  which  the  Senate  have  directed  them  to  report. 
The  bills  of  indictment  found  against  Mr.  Smith,  at  the  late  session 
of  the  circuit  court  of  the  United  States  at  Richmond,  (copies  of 
which  are  herewith  submitted,)  are  precisely  similar  to  those  found 
against  Aaron  Burr.  From  the  volume  of  printed  evidence  com- 
municated by  the  President  of  the  United  States  to  Congress,  re- 
lating to  the  trial  of  Aaron  Burr,  it  appears  that  a  great  part  of  the 
testimony  which  was  essential  to  his  conviction  upon  the  indict- 
ment for  treason,  was  withheld  from  the  jury  upon  an  opinion  of 
the  court,  that  Aaron  Burr,  not  having  been  present  at  the  overt 
act  of  treason  alleged  in  the  indictment,  no  testimony  relative  to 
his  conduct  or  declarations  elsewhere,  and  subsequent  to  the 
transactions  on  Blennerhassett's  Island  could  be  admitted.  And, 
in  consequence  of  this  suppression  of  evidence,  the  traverse  jury 
found  a  verdict  "that  Aaron  Burr  was  not  proved  to  be  guilty, 
under  that  indictment,  by  any  evidence  submitted  to  them."  It 
was  also  an  opinion  of  the  court,  that  none  of  the  transactions,  of 
which  evidence  was  given  on  the  trials  of  Aaron  Burr,  did  amount 
to  an  overt  act  of  levying  war,  and,  of  course,  that  they  did  not 
amount  to  treason.  These  decisions,  forming  the  basis  of  the  issue 
upon  the  trials  of  Burr,  anticipated  the  event  which  must  have 
awaited  the  trials  of  the  bills  against  Mr.  Smith,  who  from  the  cir- 
cumstances of  his  case,  must  have  been  entitled  to  the  benefit  of 
their  application;  they  were  the  sole  inducements  upon  which  the 
counsel  for  the  United  States  abandoned  the  prosecution  against 
him. 

Your  committee  are  not  disposed  now  to  question  the  correct- 
ness of  those  decisions  on  a  case  of  treason  before  a  court  of  crim- 
inal jurisdiction.  But  whether  the  transactions  proved  against 
Aaron  Burr  did  or  did  not  amount,  in  technical  language,  to  an 
overt  act  of  levying  war,  your  committee  have  not  a  scruple  of 
doubt  upon  their  minds  that,  but  for  the  vigilance  and  energy  of 
the  government,  and  of  faithful  citizens  under  its  directions,  in 
arresting  their  progress  and  in  crushing  his  designs,  they  would, 


iso7]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  183 

in  a  very  short  lapse  of  time,  have  terminated  not  only  in  war,  but 
in  a  war  of  the  most  horrible  description,  in  a  war  at  once  foreign 
and  domestic.  As  little  hesitation  have  your  committee  in  saying, 
that,  if  the  daylight  of  evidence  combining  one  vast  complicated 
intention,  with  overt  acts  innumerable,  be  not  excluded  from  the 
mind  by  the  curtain  of  artificial  rules,  the  simplest  understanding 
cannot  but  see  what  the  subtlest  understanding  cannot  disguise, 
crimes  before  which  ordinary  treason  whitens  into  virtue;  crimes 
of  which  war  is  the  mildest  feature.  The  debauchment  of  our 
army,  the  plunder  and  devastation  of  our  own  and  of  foreign  terri- 
tories, the  dissolution  of  our  national  Union,  and  the  root  of  in- 
terminable civil  war,  were  but  the  means  of  individual  aggrandize- 
ment, the  steps  to  projected  usurpation.  If  the  ingenuity  of  a  de- 
mon were  taxed  to  weave,  into  one  composition,  all  the  great  moral 
and  political  evils  which  could  be  inflicted  upon  the  people  of  these 
States,  it  could  produce  nothing  more  than  a  texture  of  war,  dis- 
memberment, and  despotism.  Of  these  designs,  a  grand  jury, 
composed  of  characters  as  respectable  as  this  nation  can  boast, 
have,  upon  the  solemnity  of  their  oaths,  charged  John  Smith  with 
being  an  accomplice.  The  reasons  upon  which  the  trial  of  this 
charge  has  not  been  submitted  to  the  verdict  of  a  jury,  have  been 
shown  by  your  committee,  and  are  proved  by  the  letter  from  the 
Attorney  of  the  United  States  for  the  District  of  Virginia,  herewith 
reported.  And  your  committee  are  of  opinion  that  the  dereliction 
of  the  prosecution  on  those  grounds  cannot,  in  the  slightest  degree, 
remove  the  imputation  which  the  accusations  of  the  grand  jury 
have  brought  to  the  door  of  Mr.  Smith. 

Your  committee  will  not  permit  themselves  to  comment  upon 
the  testimony  which  they  submit  herewith  to  the  Senate;  nor  upon 
the  answers  which  Mr.  Smith  has  given  as  sufficient  for  his  justifi- 
cation. Desirous  as  the  committee  have  been  that  this  justifica- 
tion might  be  complete,  anxiously  as  they  wished  for  an  oppor- 
tunity of  declaring  their  belief  of  his  innocence,  they  can  neither 
control  nor  dissemble  the  operation  of  the  evidence  upon  their 
minds;  and  however  painful  to  their  feelings,  they  find  themselves 


1 84  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1807 

compelled  by  a  sense  of  duty,  paramount  to  every  other  consid- 
eration, to  submit  to  the  Senate,  for  their  consideration  the  follow- 
ing resolution: 

Resolved,  That  John  Smith,  a  Senator  from  the  State  of  Ohio,  by 
his  participation  in  the  conspiracy  of  Aaron  Burr  against  the  peace, 
Union,  and  liberties,  of  the  people  of  the  United  States,  has  been 
guilty  of  conduct  incompatible  with  his  duty  and  station  as  a 
Senator  of  the  United  States.  And  that  he  be  therefor,  and  hereby 
is,  expelled  from  the  Senate  of  the  United  States.1 

1  "No  document  has  been  before  us,  during  the  present  session,  more  extraordinary 
than  the  one  I  now  enclose  —  the  report  of  my  colleague  in  the  case  of  John  Smith, 
Senator  from  Ohio.  To  you  any  comments,  if  I  had  now  time  to  make  them,  would 
be  impertinent."  Pickering  to  Rufus  King,  January  2,  1808.  Life  and  Correspond- 
ence of  Rufus  King,  V.  44.  "I  cannot  fail  to  express  my  serious  regret  that  the 
report  in  the  case  of  John  Smith  was  drawn  up  by  your  colleague.  The  times  are 
not  such  as  allow  men  of  learning  to  express  slight  opinions  concerning  the  forms  and 
independence  of  the  Judiciary;  under  any  circumstance  a  want  of  consideration  in 
this  respect  would  be  indiscreet;  at  a  period  when  so  much  war  and  prejudice  pre- 
vail concerning  the  importance  of  this  department  of  government,  it  is  eminently 
the  duty  of  enlightened  men  to  avoid  everything  that  may  seem  to  justify  and 
encourage  the  innovations  which  ignorant  and  wicked  men  meditate."  King  to 
Pickering,  January  7,  1808.  /£.,  50.  Plumer  learned  that  the  report  had  given 
"mortal  offense"  in  New  Hampshire,  and  sixteen  years  later  Pickering  asserted 
that  there  were  passages  in  it  which  "outraged,  I  believe,  every  distinguished 
lawyer  in  America."  See  Mass.  Hist.  Soc.  Proceedings,  XLV.  356.  A  series  of 
severe  strictures  on  the  report  appeared  in  the  New  York  Evening  Post,  Janu- 
ary, 1808,  ostentatiously  addressed  to  Adams  as  "a  Senator  of  the  United  States  and 
professor  of  Oratory  in  Massachusetts,"  and  speaks  of  him  as  "once  a  federalist." 
See  also  Adams,  Memoirs,  January  7,  and  April  9,  1808. 

In  Lowell's  Remarks  on  the  review  of  Ames'  Works  (p.  25),  he  reminded  Adams, 
that  "there  are  those  amongst  us  who  have  not  forgotten  the  report  in  the  case  of 
Senator  Smith,  where  justice,  so  far  from  being  sacred  in  her  temple,  was  to  be 
dragged  from  her  seat  to  perform  the  polluting  office  of  private  revenge;  where  the 
snail-like  pace  of  the  common  law  seemed  to  be  too  tardy  for  those  who  thirsted 
for  victims;  and  where  the  eager  minister  of  presidential  vengeance  seemed  to  sigh 
after  the  mild  mercies  of  the  star  chamber,  and  the  rapid  movements  of  the  revolu- 
tionary tribunal." 

"I  remember  that  on  my  way  home  last  May  you  informed  me  that  J.  Q.  Adams 
had  called  on  you;  and  in  speaking  of  the  acquittal  of  John  Smith  of  Ohio,  he 
ascribed  it  to  Mr.  Jefferson  whom  he  supposed  to  be  in  Smith's  hands.  This  un- 


1 8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  185 

TO  JAMES  SULLIVAN 

WASHINGTON,  10  January,  1808. 
SIR: 

I  lose  not  a  moment  in  answering  your  Excellency's  in- 
quiries with  regard  to  the  causes  of  the  embargo  so  far  as  they 
were  understood  by  me. 

1.  It  was  explicitly  recommended  by  the  President  in  a 
message  communicating  a  decision  by  order  of  the  French 
Emperor,  that  the  decree  of  21  November,  1806,  should  be 
strictly  executed  against  the  Americans,  as  well  as  all  others; 
and  also  the  British  proclamation  commanding  their  naval 
officers  to  impress  British  subjects  from  our  vessels. 

2.  The  answer  of  Mr.  Rose,  transferring  the  negotiations 
between  Great  Britain  and  this  country  from  London  to  this 
place,  was  considered  as  an  extraordinary  and  suspicious  cir- 
cumstance.   There  were  reasons  for  supposing  that  the  tone 
of  Mr.  Rose's  instructions  would  be  so  arrogant  and  over- 
bearing that  they  would  be  deemed  inadmissible  here,  and 
the  negotiation  arrested  at  the  threshold.     It  was  thought 
probable  that  the  British  squadron  on  our  coast  would  have 
instructions   to   commence  hostilities   immediately  on   the 
rupture  of  the  negotiation,  and  prudence  seemed  to  call  for  a 
measure  which  would  avoid  exposing  to  capture  any  of  our 
vessels  which  might  be  issuing  from  our  ports.    The  occur- 
rences since  Mr.  Rose's  arrival  have  tended  very  much  to  con- 
firm these  expectations.    He  has  raised  a  punctilio  without 
landing  concerning  the  treatment  not  of  himself,  but  of  the 
ship  in  which  he  came;  and  the  British  ship  Triumph  has 

doubtedly  was  the  fact.  If  you  recollect  any  fact,  stated  by  J.  Q.  A.  as  the  ground 
of  his  opinion,  I  should  be  glad  to  know  it."  Pickering  to  Rufus  King,  January  21, 
1809.  King  replied  that  no  fact  was  mentioned  in  support  of  this  opinion.  Life 
and  Correspondence  of  Rufus  King,  V.  129,  132. 


1 86  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

been  into  Lynn  Haven  Bay,  and  received  dispatches  from 
the  station. 

3.  There  was  all  but  official  intelligence  that  the  British 
king  had  issued  a  retaliating  proclamation  to  counteract  that 
of  France,  and  of  equal  extent.    It  was  obvious  that  between 
the  two,  every  American  vessel  that  should  be  permitted  to 
sail  would  go  to  almost  certain  capture  and  condemnation. 
A  temporary  suspension  of  their  departure  was  thought 
therefore  necessary. 

4.  It  was  probable  that  the  embargo,  by  throwing  out  of 
employment  the  British  sailors  in  this  country,  would  induce 
them  to  return  of  their  own  accord  to  the  ships  of  their  own 
sovereign.     To  me  this  was  a  very  desirable  circumstance,  for 
I  believed  it  would  take  away  the  only  pretext  the  British 
have  to  offer  for  engaging  in  a  quarrel  with  us. 

5.  It  was  an  experiment  to  see  how  far  the  Government 
might  calculate  upon  the  support  of  the  people  for  the  main- 
tenance of  their  own  rights.    It  was  useful  and  might  be  of  im- 
portance to  the  country,  to  commence  this  experiment  and 
observe  its  effects  before  the  negotiation  with  Mr.  Rose 
should  commence. 

On  the  whole  I  considered  it  as  a  measure  eminently  cal- 
culated for  the  preservation  of  peace,  as  it  would  at  once 
diminish  the  temptations  and  opportunities  of  the  enemy  to 
commence  war  against  us,  and  as  it  would  prepare  our  own 
people  for  an  acquiescence  in  terms  on  our  part,  which,  with- 
out sacrificing  any  of  our  rights,  might  still  go  further  to 
conciliation  than  the  temper  of  the  people  would  have 
brooked  without  it.  Yet  it  was  a  measure  so  necessarily  dis- 
tressing to  ourselves,  that  I  should  have  hesitated  upon  it, 
but  for  the  decisive  recommendation  of  the  President. 

The  letters  of  Messrs.  Armstrong  and  Champagny  about 
which  so  much  has  been  said,  related  solely  to  the  decree  of 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  187 

21  November,  1806.  Nothing  more  was  communicated  to 
Congress.  It  was,  however,  in  my  mind  a  measure  merely 
precautionary  and  which  I  had  and  have  no  idea  will  be 
of  long  continuance.  General  embargoes  of  six  or  twelve 
months,  of  which  some  gentlemen  talk  so  lightly,  never 
entered  my  brain  as  practicable  things  in  a  great  com- 
mercial country.  I  question  whether  an  example  of  the 
kind  can  be  found  in  history. 
I  am,  etc. 


MOTION  ON  THE  EMBARGO 

January  1 1,  1808. 

Resolved,  That  a  committee  be  appointed,  with  leave  to  report 
by  bill  or  otherwise,  and  instructed  to  inquire  at  what  period  the 
present  embargo  can,  consistently  with  the  public  interest,  be  re- 
moved; and  whether,  in  what  manner,  and  to  what  extent,  upon 
its  removal,  the  merchant  vessels  of  the  United  States  shall  be 
permitted,  in  defence  of  their  lawful  commerce,  to  be  armed  against, 
and  to  resist,  foreign  aggression.1 

1  Annals  of  Congress,  loth  Cong.,  ist  Sess.,  I.  79;  Adams,  New  England  Federalism, 
190.  The  motion  was  defeated  by  a  vote  of  ten  to  seventeen.  "I  am  glad  to  see 
your  motion  on  the  embargo;  it  will  do  good  for  those  who  are  opposed  to  that 
measure  to  have  an  opportunity  to  express  their  minds."  James  Sullivan  to  John 
Quincy  Adams,  January  23,  1808.  Ms.  "A  suffering  community  will  thank  Mr. 
Adams  for  proposing  an  inquiry:  but  as  the  Legislature  evidently  did  not  know 
why  they  laid  it  on,  they  cannot  know  why  nor  when  they  ought  to  take  it  off. 
They  professed  to  be  governed  by  the  President's  recommendation,  and  they  must 
wait  his  pleasure."  The  Repertory,  February  2,  1808.  A  report  on  the  case  of  the 
ship  Manilla,  prepared  by  Adams,  is  in  Annals  of  Congress,  loth  Cong.j  1st  Sess., 
I.  107. 


1 88  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

fc 

WASHINGTON,  27  January,  1808. 

MY  DEAR  SIR: 

I  have  already  written  you  a  very  long  letter  in  answer  to 
your  favor  of  the  8th  instant,1  and  after  writing  it  upon  read- 
ing it  over  concluded  the  best  disposition  I  could  make  of  it 
would  be  to  burn  it.  Accordingly  the  flames  have  consumed 
it,  and  I  must  begin  again. 

Your  answers  and  observations  upon  my  inquiries  re- 
specting the  impressment  of  our  seamen  by  the  British  are 
of  the  highest  interest.  But  this  general  question  has  been 
absorbed  by  the  new  decrees  of  the  great  contending  bel- 
ligerent powers.  Right  and  wrong  are  no  longer  subjects  of 
discussion  in  our  concerns  with  European  nations.  They 
appear  to  be  agreed  in  the  determination  that  there  shall  be 
no  more  neutrality,  and  our  only  choice  is  which  of  the  two 
we  will  resist. 

I  am  very  sensible  of  that  situation  in  which  you  consider 
me  to  stand,  and  that  being  now  wholly  unsupported  by  any 
great  party  the  expiration  of  my  present  term  of  service  will 
dismiss  me  from  my  public  station.  By  this  event  my  vanity 
may  be  affected,  but  in  every  other  respect  it  will  be  a  relief. 
Deeming  it  inconsistent  with  my  duties  ever  to  shrink  from 
the  service  of  my  country  I  have  always  adhered  to  the  prin- 
ciple that  I  should  not  solicit  any  of  its  favors.  The  present 
time  and  the  prospects  of  the  nation  are  such  that  a  seat  in 
the  public  councils  cannot  be  an  object  of  my  desire.  My 
literary  profession  and  the  education  of  my  children  will 
occupy  all  my  time  in  a  manner  which  will  furnish  me  duties 
enough  to  discharge.  I  shall  also  resume  the  practice  of  the 

1  Printed  in  Mass.  Hist.  Soc.  Proceedings,  XLIV.  422. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  189 

law  as  far  as  that  will  resume  me,  and  although  this  is  a 
business  for  which  I  know  myself  to  be  indifferently  qualified, 
I  shall  still  pursue  it  as  far  as  my  circumstances  will  admit.1 
Notwithstanding  the  critical  situation  of  the  country  the 
two  Houses  of  Congress  are  acting  very  much  at  their  leisure, 
and  from  their  present  proceedings  one  would  imagine  we 
were  in  a  state  of  profound  peace.  The  presidential  election 
engrosses  the  principal  attention  of  the  members.  About 
one-half  the  members  of  both  houses  here  have  declared  in 
favor  of  Mr.  Madison  and  to  re-elect  the  Vice  President.  In 
the  legislature  of  Virginia,  also,  the  friends  of  Mr.  Madison 
have  outnumbered  those  of  Mr.  Monroe  nearly  three  to  one. 
I  understand  that  by  way  of  making  a  temporary  provision 
for  Mr.  Monroe  he  is  to  be  chosen  Governor  of  Virginia.  .  .  . 

TO  HARRISON  GRAY  OTIS  2 

WASHINGTON,  March  31,  1808. 
DEAR  SIR: 

I  have  received  from  one  of  my  friends  in  Boston  a  copy 
of  a  printed  pamphlet,  containing  a  letter  from  Mr.  Pick- 

1  "Your  situation  you  think  critical;  I  think  it  is  clear,  plain,  and  obvious.  You 
are  supported  by  no  party;  you  have  too  honest  a  heart,  too  independent  a  mind, 
and  too  brilliant  talents,  to  be  sincerely  and  confidentially  trusted  by  any  man 
who  is  under  the  dominion  of  party  maxims  or  party  feelings.  And  where  is  there 
another  man  who  is  not?  You  may  depend  upon  it  then  that  your  fate  is  decided. 
You  will  be  countenanced  neither  by  France,  Spain  or  England.  You  will  be  sup- 
ported neither  by  federalists  nor  republicans.  In  the  next  Congress  Dr.  Eustis  will 
be  chosen  senator,  and  you  will  be  numbered  among  the  dead,  like  Jay,  Ellsworth, 
King,  Ames,  Dexter,  and  a  hundred  others  of  the  brightest  geniuses  of  the  country. 
You  ought  to  know  and  expect  this,  and  by  no  means  to  regret  it.  Return  to  your 
professorship,  but  above  all  to  your  office  as  a  lawyer.  Devote  yourself  to  your 
profession  and  the  education  of  your  children."  John  Adams  to  John  Quincy  Adams, 
January  8,  1808.  Ms.  On  the  interview  with  Jefferson,  March  15,  see  Adams, 
Memoirs,  I.  521;  New  England  Federalism,  12,  24. 

occasion  for  this  pamphlet  is  related  in  the  "Appendix,"  prepared  in  1824, 


igo  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

ering  to  the  Governor  of  the  Commonwealth,  intended  for 
communication  to  the  legislature  of  the  State,  during  their 
session,  recently  concluded.  But  this  object  not  having  been 
accomplished,  it  appears  to  have  been  published  by  some 
friend  of  the  writer,  whose  inducement  is  stated,  no  doubt 
truly,  to  have  been  the  importance  of  the  matter  discussed 
in  it,  and  the  high  respectability  of  the  author. 

The  subjects  of  this  letter  are  the  embargo,  and  the  dif- 
ferences in  controversy  between  our  country  and  Great 
Britain  —  subjects  upon  which  it  is  my  misfortune,  in  the 
discharge  of  my  duties  as  a  Senator  of  the  United  States,  to 
differ  from  the  opinions  of  my  Colleague.  The  place  where 
the  question  upon  the  first  of  them,  in  common  with  others 
of  great  national  concern,  was  between  him  and  me,  in  our 
official  capacities  a  proper  object  of  discussion,  was  the 
Senate  of  the  Union.  There  it  was  discussed,  and,  as  far 

and  now  reprinted  (p.  224,  infra).  Although  the  name  of  Adams  did  not  appear  in 
Pickering's  pamphlet,  the  intention  of  the  attack  could  not  be  mistaken.  Published 
in  the  last  hours  of  the  session  of  the  General  Court,  immediately  before  the  State 
election,  on  the  result  of  which  would  hang  the  choice  of  a  United  States  senator  to 
fill  the  place  then  occupied  by  Adams,  it  served  as  an  active  electioneering  device 
in  a  community  dependent  upon  commerce,  and  already  experiencing  the  effects 
of  the  embargo.  March  16,  Adams  received  a  copy  of  Pickering's  pamphlet,  and 
prepared  this  reply,  which  appeared  April  9.  See  Adams,  New  England  Federalism, 
194. 

"  I  had  the  honour  to  receive  your  letter  to  Mr.  Otis  on  Thursday  evening  last,  and 
have  attended  to  its  publication,  with  as  much  expedition  as  possible.  The  printers 
have  published  an  edition  of  a  thousand  copies;  the  sale  of  them  commenced  this 
morning,  and  the  whole  are  now  disposed  of.  Oliver  and  Munroe  are  now  printing 
a  second  edition  of  a  thousand  more  on  their  own  account  and  have  contracted  with 
several  of  the  democrats,  with  Eben  Larkin  bookseller  at  their  head,  to  print  three 
thousand  more  for  general  circulation  in  the  Country.  In  consequence  of  the  great 
haste  with  which  they  were  printed,  some  few  errors  have  escaped  us,  which  I  shall 
see  corrected  in  the  second  edition.  I  sent  you  several  copies  last  evening  and  now 
send  you  several  more  by  this  mail.  I  have  also  agreeably  to  your  direction  sent  a 
copy  to  Governour  Sullivan  and  to  Mr.  Otis.  .  .  ."  William  S.  Shaw  to  John 
Quincy  Adams,  April  9,  1808.  Ms. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  191 

as  the  constitutional  authority  of  that  body  extended,  there 
it  was  decided.  Having  obtained  alike  the  concurrence  of 
the  other  branch  of  the  national  legislature,  and  the  approba- 
tion of  the  President,  it  became  the  law  of  the  land,  and  as 
such  I  have  considered  it  entitled  to  the  respect  and  obedience 
of  every  virtuous  citizen. 

From  these  decisions,  however,  the  letter  in  question  is 
to  be  considered  in  the  nature  of  an  appeal;  in  the  first  in- 
stance, to  our  common  constituents,  the  legislature  of  the 
State;  and  in  the  second,  by  the  publication,  to  the  people. 
To  both  these  tribunals  I  shall  always  hold  myself  account- 
able for  every  act  of  my  public  life.  Yet,  were  my  own 
political  character  alone  implicated  in  the  course  which  has 
in  this  instance  been  pursued,  I  should  have  forborne  all 
notice  of  the  proceeding,  and  have  left  my  conduct  in  this, 
as  in  other  cases,  to  the  candor  and  discretion  of  my  Country. 

But  to  this  species  of  appeal,  thus  conducted,  there  are 
some  objects  on  constitutional  grounds,  which  I  deem  it  my 
duty  to  mention  for  the  consideration  of  the  public.  On  a 
statement  of  circumstances  attending  a  very  important  act 
of  national  legislation,  a  statement  which  the  writer  un- 
doubtedly believed  to  be  true,  but  which  comes  only  from 
one  side  of  the  question  and  which,  I  expect  to  prove  in  the 
most  essential  points  erroneous,  the  writer  with  the  most 
animated  tone  of  energy  calls  for  the  interposition  of  the 
commercial  States,  and  asserts  that  "nothing  but  their 
sense,  clearly  and  emphatically  expressed,  will  save  them 
from  ruin."  This  solemn  and  alarming  invocation  is  ad- 
dressed to  the  legislature  of  Massachusetts,  at  so  late  a 
period  of  their  session,  that  had  it  been  received  by  them, 
they  must  have  been  compelled  either  to  act  upon  the  views 
of  this  representation,  without  hearing  the  counter  statement 
of  the  other  side,  or  seemingly  to  disregard  the  pressing  in- 


192  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

terest  of  their  constituents,  by  neglecting  an  admonition  of 
the  most  serious  complexion.  Considering  the  application 
as  a  precedent,  its  tendency  is  dangerous  to  the  public.  For 
on  the  first  supposition,  that  the  legislature  had  been  pre- 
cipitated to  act  on  the  spur  of  such  an  instigation,  they  must 
have  acted  on  imperfect  information,  and  under  an  excite- 
ment, not  remarkably  adapted  to  the  composure  of  safe  de- 
liberation. On  the  second  they  would  have  been  exposed  to 
unjust  imputations,  which  at  the  eve  of  an  election  might 
have  operated  in  the  most  inequitable  manner  upon  the 
characters  of  individual  members. 

The  interposition  of  one  or  more  State  legislatures,  to 
control  the  exercise  of  the  powers  vested  by  the  general 
Constitution  in  the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  is  at  least 
of  questionable  policy.  The  views  of  a  State  legislature  are 
naturally  and  properly  limited  in  a  considerable  degree  to  the 
particular  interests  of  the  State.  The  very  object  and  for- 
mation of  the  national  deliberative  assemblies  was  for  the 
compromise  and  conciliation  of  the  interests  of  all  —  of  the 
whole  nation.  If  the  appeal  from  the  regular,  legitimate 
measures  of  the  body  where  the  whole  nation  is  represented, 
be  proper  to  one  State  legislature,  it  must  be  so  to  another. 
If  the  commercial  States  are  called  to  interpose  on  one  hand, 
will  not  the  agricultural  States  be  with  equal  propriety  sum- 
moned to  interpose  on  the  other?  If  the  East  is  stimulated 
against  the  West,  and  the  Northern  and  Southern  Sections 
are  urged  into  collision  with  each  other,  by  appeals  from  the 
acts  of  Congress  to  the  respective  States  —  in  what  are  these 
appeals  to  end  ? 

It  is  undoubtedly  the  right,  and  may  often  become  the 
duty  of  a  State  legislature,  to  address  that  of  the  nation, 
with  the  expression  of  its  wishes,  in  regard  to  interests  pe- 
culiarly concerning  the  State  itself.  Nor  shall  I  question  the 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  193 

right  of  every  member  of  the  great  federative  compact  to 
declare  its  own  sense  of  measures  interesting  to  the  nation 
at  large.  But  whenever  the  case  occurs  that  this  sense 
should  be  "clearly  and  emphatically >:  expressed,  it  ought 
surely  to  be  predicated  upon  a  full  and  impartial  considera- 
tion of  the  whole  subject  —  not  under  the  stimulus  of  a 
one-sided  representation  —  far  less  upon  the  impulse  of  con- 
jectures and  suspicions.  It  is  not  through  the  medium  of 
personal  sensibility,  nor  of  party  bias,  nor  of  professional 
occupation,  nor  of  geographical  position,  that  the  whole 
truth  can  be  discerned,  of  questions  involving  the  rights  and 
interests  of  this  extensive  Union.  When  their  discussion  is 
urged  upon  a  State  legislature,  the  first  call  upon  its  members 
should  be  to  cast  all  their  feelings  and  interests  as  the  citi- 
zens of  a  single  State  into  the  common  stock  of  the  national 
concern. 

Should  the  occurrence  upon  which  an  appeal  is  made  from 
the  councils  of  the  nation,  to  those  of  a  single  State  be  one, 
upon  which  the  representation  of  the  State  had  been  divided, 
and  the  member  who  found  himself  in  the  minority,  felt  im- 
pelled by  a  sense  of  duty  to  invoke  the  interposition  of  his 
constituents,  it  would  seem  that  both  in  justice  to  them,  and 
in  candor  to  his  colleague,  some  notice  of  such  intention 
should  be  given  to  him,  that  he  too  might  be  prepared  to  ex- 
hibit his  views  of  the  subject  upon  which  the  difference  of 
opinion  had  taken  place;  or,  at  least  that  the  resort  should 
be  had,  at  such  a  period  of  time  as  would  leave  it  within  the 
reach  of  possibility  for  his  representations  to  be  received,  by 
their  common  constituents,  before  they  would  be  compelled 
to  decide  on  the  merits  of  the  case. 

The  fairness  and  propriety  of  this  course  of  proceeding 
must  be  so  obvious,  that  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  the  pro- 
priety of  any  other.  Yet  it  presents  another  inconvenience 


i94  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

which  must  necessarily  result  from  this  practice  of  appellate 
legislation.  When  one  of  the  senators  from  a  State  proclaims 
to  his  constituents  that  a  particular  measure,  or  system  of 
measures  which  has  received  the  vote  and  support  of  his 
colleague,  are  pernicious  and  destructive  to  those  interests 
which  both  are  bound  by  the  most  sacred  of  ties,  with  zeal 
and  fidelity  to  promote,  the  denunciation  of  the  measures 
amounts  to  little  less  than  a  denunciation  of  the  man.  The 
advocate  of  a  policy  thus  reprobated  must  feel  himself  sum- 
moned by  every  motive  of  self-defence  to  vindicate  his  con- 
duct: and  if  his  general  sense  of  his  official  duties  would  bind 
him  to  the  industrious  devotion  of  his  whole  time  to  the  pub- 
lic business  of  the  session,  the  hours  which  he  might  be  forced 
to  employ  for  his  own  justification,  would  of  course  be  de- 
ducted from  the  discharge  of  his  more  regular  and  appropri- 
ate functions.  Should  these  occasions  frequently  recur,  they 
could  not  fail  to  interfere  with  the  due  performance  of  the 
public  business.  Nor  can  I  forbear  to  remark  the  tendency 
of  such  antagonizing  appeals  to  distract  the  councils  of  the 
State  in  its  own  legislature,  to  destroy  its  influence,  and  ex- 
pose it  to  derision,  in  the  presence  of  its  sister  States,  and  to 
produce  between  the  colleagues  themselves  mutual  asperities 
and  rancors,  until  the  great  concerns  of  the  nation  would 
degenerate  into  the  puny  controversies  of  personal  alterca- 
tion. 

It  is  therefore  with  extreme  reluctance  that  I  enter  upon 
this  discussion.  In  developing  my  own  views  and  the  prin- 
ciples which  have  governed  my  conduct  in  relation  to  our 
foreign  affairs,  and  particularly  to  the  embargo,  some  very 
material  differences  in  point  of  fact  as  well  as  of  opinion,  will 
be  found  between  my  statements,  and  those  of  the  letter, 
which  alone  can  apologize  for  this.  They  will  not,  I  trust, 
be  deemed  in  any  degree  disrespectful  to  the  writer.  Far 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  195 

more  pleasing  would  it  have  been  to  me,  could  that  honest 
and  anxious  pursuit  of  the  policy  best  calculated  to  promote 
the  honor  and  welfare  of  our  country,  which,  I  trust,  is  felt 
with  equal  ardor  by  us  both,  have  resulted  in  the  same  opin- 
ions, and  have  given  them  the  vigor  of  united  exertion. 
There  is  a  candor  and  liberality  of  conduct  and  of  sentiment 
due  from  associates  in  the  same  public  charge,  towards  each 
other,  necessary  to  their  individual  reputation,  to  their 
common  influence,  and  to  their  public  usefulness.  In  our 
republican  government,  where  the  power  of  the  nation  con- 
sists alone  in  the  sympathies  of  opinion,  this  reciprocal  def- 
erence, this  open  hearted  imputation  of  honest  intentions,  is 
the  only  adamant  at  once  attractive  and  impenetrable,  that 
can  bear,  unshattered,  all  the  thunder  of  foreign  hostility. 
Ever  since  I  have  had  the  honor  of  a  seat  in  the  national 
councils,  I  have  extended  it  to  every  department  of  the 
government.  However  differing  in  my  conclusions,  upon 
questions  of  the  highest  moment,  from  any  other  man,  of 
whatever  party,  I  have  never,  upon  suspicion,  imputed  his 
conduct  to  corruption.  If  this  confidence  argues  ignorance  of 
public  men  and  public  affairs,  to  that  ignorance  I  must  plead 
guilty.  I  know,  indeed,  enough  of  human  nature  to  be  sen- 
sible that  vigilant  observation  is  at  all  times,  and  that  sus- 
picion may  occasionally  become  necessary,  upon  the  conduct 
of  men  in  power.  But  I  know  as  well  that  confidence  is  the 
only  cement  of  an  elective  government.  Election  is  the  very 
test  of  confidence,  and  its  periodical  return  is  the  constitu- 
tional check  upon  its  abuse;  of  which  the  electors  must  of 
course  be  the  sole  judges.  For  the  exercise  of  power,  where 
man  is  free,  confidence  is  indispensable;  and  when  it  once 
totally  fails,  when  the  men  to  whom  the  people  have  com- 
mitted the  application  of  their  force,  for  their  benefit,  are 
to  be  presumed  of  the  vilest  of  mankind,  the  very  foundation 


196  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

of  the  social  compact  must  be  dissolved.  Towards  the  gentle- 
man whose  official  station  results  from  the  confidence  of  the 
same  legislature,  by  whose  appointment  I  have  the  honor  of 
holding  a  similar  trust,  I  have  thought  this  confidence  pe- 
culiarly due  from  me,  nor  should  I  now  notice  his  letter,  not- 
withstanding the  disapprobation  it  so  obviously  implies  at 
the  course  which  I  have  pursued  in  relation  to  the  subjects  of 
which  it  treats,  did  it  not  appear  to  me  calculated  to  produce 
upon  the  public  mind,  impressions  unfavorable  to  the  rights 
and  interests  of  the  nation. 

Having  understood  that  a  motion  in  the  Senate  of  Massa- 
chusetts was  made  by  you,  requesting  the  Governor  to  trans- 
mit Mr.  Pickering's  letter  to  the  legislature,  together  with 
such  communications,  relating  to  public  affairs,  as  he  might 
have  received  from  me,1  I  avail  myself  of  the  circumstance, 
and  of  the  friendship  which  has  so  long  subsisted  between 
us,  to  take  the  liberty  of  addressing  this  letter,  intended  for 
publication,  to  you.  Very  few  of  the  facts  which  I  shall  state 
will  rest  upon  information  peculiar  to  myself.  Most  of  them 
will  stand  upon  the  basis  of  official  documents,  or  of  public 
and  undisputed  notoriety.  For  my  opinions,  though  fully 
persuaded,  that  even  where  differing  from  your  own,  they 
will  meet  with  a  fair  and  liberal  judge  in  you,  yet  of  the 
public  I  ask  neither  favor  nor  indulgence.  Pretending  to  no 
extraordinary  credit  from  the  authority  of  the  writer,  I  am 
sensible  they  must  fall  by  their  own  weakness,  or  stand  by 
their  own  strength. 

The  first  remark  which  obtrudes  itself  upon  the  mind 
upon  the  perusal  of  Mr.  Pickering's  letter  is,  that  in  enumer- 
ating all  the  pretences  (for  he  thinks  there  are  no  causes)  for 
the  embargo,  and  for  a  war  with  Great  Britain,  he  has  totally 
omitted  the  British  Orders  of  Council  of  November  II,  1807, 

1  Columbian  Centinel,  March  9,  1808.    The  motion  was  negatived. 


1808]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  197 

those  orders  under  which  millions  of  the  property  of  our 
fellow  citizens,  are  now  detained  in  British  hands,  or  con- 
fiscated to  British  captors,  those  orders,  under  which  tenfold 
as  many  millions  of  the  same  property  would  have  been  at 
this  moment  in  the  same  predicament,  had  they  not  been 
saved  from  exposure  to  it  by  the  embargo,  those  orders, 
which  if  once  submitted  to  and  carried  to  the  extent  of  their 
principles,  would  not  have  left  an  inch  of  American  canvas 
upon  the  ocean,  but  under  British  license  and  British  taxa- 
tion. An  attentive  reader  of  the  letter,  without  other  infor- 
mation, would  not  even  suspect  their  existence.  They  are 
indeed  in  one  or  two  passages,  faintly,  and  darkly  alluded  to 
under  the  justifying  description  of  "the  orders  of  the  British 
government,  retaliating  the  French  imperial  decree:  *'  but  as 
causes  for  the  embargo,  or  as  possible  causes  or  even  pre- 
tences of  war  with  Great  Britain,  they  are  not  only  unnoticed, 
but  their  very  existence  is  by  direct  implication  denied. 

It  is  indeed  true,  that  these  orders  were  not  officially 
communicated  with  the  President's  message  recommending 
the  embargo.  They  had  not  been  officially  received.  But 
they  were  announced  in  several  paragraphs  from  London  and 
Liverpool  newspapers  of  the  loth,  nth  and  I2th  of  Novem- 
ber, which  appeared  in  the  National  Intelligencer  of  i8th 
December,  the  day  upon  which  the  embargo  message  was 
sent  to  Congress.  The  British  government  had  taken  care 
that  they  should  not  be  authentically  known  before  their 
time  —  for  the  very  same  newspapers  which  gave  this  in- 
official notice  of  these  orders,  announced  also  the  departure 
of  Mr.  Rose,  upon  a  special  mission  to  the  United  States. 
And  we  know  that  of  these  all-devouring  instruments  of 
rapine  Mr.  Rose  was  not  even  informed.  His  mission  was 
professedly  a  mission  of  conciliation  and  reparation  for  a 
flagrant,  enormous,  acknowledged  outrage.  But  he  was  not 


198  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

sent  with  these  Orders  of  Council  in  his  hands.  His  text 
was  the  disavowal  of  Admiral  Berkeley's  conduct.  The 
commentary  was  to  be  discovered  on  another  page  of  the 
British  ministerial  policy.  On  the  face  of  Mr.  Rose's  instruc- 
tions, these  Orders  of  Council  were  as  invisible,  as  they  are 
on  that  of  Mr.  Pickering's  letter. 

They  were  not  merely  without  official  authenticity.  Ru- 
mors had  for  several  weeks  been  in  circulation  derived  from 
English  prints,  and  from  private  correspondences,  that  such 
orders  were  to  issue;  and  no  inconsiderable  pains  were  taken 
here  to  discredit  the  fact.  Assurances  were  given  that  there 
was  reason  to  believe  no  such  orders  to  be  contemplated. 
Suspicion  was  lulled  by  declarations  equivalent  nearly  to  a 
positive  denial:  and  these  opiates  were  continued  for  weeks 
after  the  embargo  was  laid,  until  Mr.  Erskine  received  in- 
structions to  make  the  official  communication  of  the  orders 
themselves,  in  their  proper  shape,  to  our  government. 

Yet,  although  thus  unauthenticated,  and  even  although 
thus  in  some  sort  denied,  the  probability  of  the  circumstances 
under  which  they  were  announced,  and  the  sweeping  tend- 
ency of  their  effects,  formed  to  my  understanding  a  power- 
ful motive,  and  together  with  the  papers  sent  by  the  Presi- 
dent, and  his  express  recommendation,  a  decisive  one,  for 
assenting  to  the  embargo.  As  a  precautionary  measure,  I 
believed  it  would  rescue  an  immense  property  from  depreda- 
tion, if  the  orders  should  prove  authentic.  If  the  alarm  was 
groundless,  it  must  very  soon  be  disproved,  and  the  embargo 
might  be  removed  with  the  danger. 

The  omission  of  all  notice  of  these  facts  in  the  pressing 
enquiries  "why  the  Embargo  was  laid?"  is  the  more  surpris- 
ing, because  they  are  of  all  the  facts,  the  most  material,  upon 
a  fair  and  impartial  examination  of  the  expediency  of  that 
Act,  when  it  passed.  And  because  these  orders,  together 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  199 

with  the  subsequent  'retaliating  decrees'  of  France  and 
Spain,  have  furnished  the  only  reasons  upon  which  I  have 
acquiesced  in  its  continuance  to  this  day.  If  duly  weighed, 
they  will  save  us  the  trouble  of  resorting  to  jealousies  of 
secret  corruption,  and  the  imaginary  terrors  of  Napoleon  for 
the  real  cause  of  the  embargo.  These  are  fictions  of  foreign 
invention.  The  French  Emperor  had  not  declared  that  he 
would  have  no  neutrals.  He  had  not  required  that  our  ports 
should  be  shut  against  British  commerce  —  but  the  Orders 
of  Council  if  submitted  to  would  have  degraded  us  to  the 
condition  of  colonies.  If  resisted  would  have  fattened  the 
wolves  of  plunder  with  our  spoils.  The  embargo  was  the 
only  shelter  from  the  Tempest  —  the  last  refuge  of  our 
violated  peace. 

I  have  indeed  been  myself  of  opinion  that  the  embargo, 
must  in  its  nature  be  a  temporary  expedient,  and  that  prep- 
arations manifesting  a  determination  of  resistance  against 
these  outrageous  violations  of  our  neutral  rights  ought  at 
least  to  have  been  made  a  subject  of  serious  deliberation  in 
Congress.  I  have  believed  and  do  still  believe  that  our  in- 
ternal resources  are  competent  to  the  establishment  and 
maintenance  of  a  naval  force,  public  and  private,  if  not  fully 
adequate  to  the  protection  and  defence  of  our  commerce,  at 
least  sufficient  to  induce  a  retreat  from  these  hostilities  and 
to  deter  from  a  renewal  of  them,  by  either  of  the  warring 
parties;  and  that  a  system  to  that  effect  might  be  formed, 
ultimately  far  more  economical,  and  certainly  more  energetic 
than  a  three  years  embargo.  Very  soon  after  the  closure  of 
our  ports,  I  did  submit  to  the  consideration  of  the  Senate,  a 
proposition  for  the  appointment  of  a  committee  to  institute 
an  enquiry  to  this  end.  But  my  resolution  met  no  encourage- 
ment. Attempts  of  a  similar  nature  have  been  made  in  the 
House  of  Representatives,  but  have  been  equally  discoun- 


200  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

tenanced,  and  from  these  determinations  by  decided  major- 
ities of  both  houses,  I  am  not  sufficiently  confident  in  the 
superiority  of  my  own  wisdom  to  appeal,  by  a  topical  ap- 
plication to  the  congenial  feelings  of  any  one  —  not  even  of 
my  own  native  section  of  the  Union. 

The  embargo,  however,  is  a  restriction  always  under  our 
own  control.  It  was  a  measure  altogether  of  defence  and  of 
experiment.  If  it  was  injudiciously  or  over-hastily  laid,  it 
has  been  every  day  since  its  adoption  open  to  a  repeal:  if  it 
should  prove  ineffectual  for  the  purposes  which  it  was  meant 
to  secure,  a  single  day  will  suffice  to  unbar  the  doors.  Still 
believing  it  a  measure  justified  by  the  circumstances  of  the 
time,  I  am  ready  to  admit  that  those  who  thought  otherwise 
may  have  had  a  wiser  foresight  of  events,  and  a  sounder 
judgment  of  the  then  existing  state  of  things  than  the 
majority  of  the  national  legislature,  and  the  President.  It 
has  been  approved  by  several  of  the  State  legislatures,  and 
among  the  rest  by  our  own.  Yet  of  all  its  effects  we  are  still 
unable  to  judge  with  certainty.  It  must  still  abide  the  test 
of  futurity.  I  shall  add  that  there  were  other  motives  which 
had  their  operation  in  contributing  to  the  passage  of  the  act, 
unnoticed  by  Mr.  Pickering,  and  which  having  now  ceased 
will  also  be  left  unnoticed  by  me.  The  Orders  of  Council  of 
nth  November  still  subsist  in  all  their  force;  and  are  now 
confirmed,  with  the  addition  of  taxation,  by  act  of  Parlia- 
ment. 

As  they  stand  in  front  of  the  real  causes  for  the  embargo, 
so  they  are  entitled  to  the  same  pre-eminence  in  enumerating 
the  causes  of  hostility,  which  the  British  ministers  are  ac- 
cumulating upon  our  forbearance.  They  strike  at  the  root 
of  our  independence.  They  assume  the  principle  that  we 
shall  have  no  commerce  in  time  of  war,  but  with  her  domin- 
ions, and  as  tributaries  to  her.  The  exclusive  confinement  of 


1808]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  201 

commerce  to  the  mother  country,  is  the  great  principle  of  the 
modern  colonial  system;  and  should  we  by  a  dereliction  of  our 
rights  at  this  momentous  stride  of  encroachment  surrender 
our  commercial  freedom  without  a  struggle,  Britain  has  but 
a  single  step  more  to  take,  and  she  brings  us  back  to  the 
stamp  act  and  the  tea  tax. 

Yet  these  orders  —  thus  fatal  to  the  liberties  for  which 
the  sages  and  heroes  of  our  revolution  toiled  and  bled  — 
thus  studiously  concealed  until  the  moment  when  they  burst 
upon  our  heads  —  thus  issued  at  the  very  instant  when  a  mis- 
sion of  atonement  was  professedly  sent  —  in  these  orders  we 
are  to  see  nothing  but  a  "retaliating  order  upon  France"  — 
in  these  orders,  we  must  not  find  so  much  as  a  cause  —  nay 
not  so  much  as  a  pretence,  for  complaint  against  Britain. 

To  my  mind,  sir,  in  comparison  with  those  orders,  the  three 
causes  to  which  Mr.  Pickering  explicitly  limits  our  grounds 
for  a  rupture  with  England,  might  indeed  be  justly  denom- 
inated pretences;  in  comparison  with  them,  former  aggres- 
sions sink  into  insignificance.  To  argue  upon  the  subject  of 
our  disputes  with  Britain,  or  upon  the  motives  for  the  em- 
bargo, and  keep  them  out  of  sight,  is  like  laying  your  finger 
over  the  unit  before  a  series  of  noughts,  and  then  arith- 
metically proving  that  they  all  amount  to  nothing. 

It  is  not  however  in  a  mere  omission,  nor  yet  in  the  history 
of  the  embargo,  that  the  inaccuracies  of  the  statement  I  am 
examining  have  given  me  the  most  serious  concern  —  it  is 
in  the  view  taken  of  the  questions  in  controversy  between 
us  and  Britain.  The  wisdom  of  the  embargo  is  a  question  of 
great,  but  transient  magnitude,  and  omission  sacrifices  no 
national  right.  Mr.  Pickering's  object  was  to  dissuade  the 
nation  from  a  war  with  England,  into  which  he  suspected  the 
administration  was  plunging  us,  under  French  compulsion. 
But  the  tendency  of  his  pamphlet  is  to  reconcile  the  nation, 


202  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

or  at  least  the  commercial  states,  to  the  servitude  of  British 
protection,  and  war  with  all  the  rest  of  Europe.  Hence  Eng- 
land is  represented  as  contending  for  the  common  liberties  of 
mankind,  and  our  only  safe-guard  against  the  ambition  and 
injustice  of  France.  Hence  all  our  sensibilities  are  invoked 
in  her  favor,  and  all  our  antipathies  against  her  antagonist. 
Hence,  too,  all  the  subjects  of  difference  between  us  and 
Britain  are  alleged  to  be  on  our  part  mere  -pretences,  of 
which  the  right  is  unequivocally  pronounced  to  be  on  her 
side.  Proceeding  from  a  Senator  of  the  United  States,  spe- 
cially charged  as  a  member  of  the  executive  with  the  main- 
tenance of  the  nation's  rights,  against  foreign  powers,  and 
at  a  moment  extremely  critical  of  pending  negotiation  upon 
all  the  points  thus  delineated,  this  formal  abandonment  of  the 
American  cause,  this  summons  of  unconditional  surrender  to 
the  pretensions  of  our  antagonist,  is  in  my  mind  highly  alarm- 
ing. It  becomes  therefore  a  duty  to  which  every  other  con- 
sideration must  yield  to  point  out  the  errors  of  this  repre- 
sentation. Before  we  strike  the  standard  of  the  nation,  let 
us  at  least  examine  the  purport  of  the  summons. 

And  first,  with  respect  to  the  impressment  of  our  seamen. 
We  are  told  that  "the  taking  of  British  seamen  found  on 
board  our  merchant  vessels,  by  British  ships  of  war,  is 
agreeably  to  a  right,  claimed  and  exercised  for  ages."  It  is 
obvious  that  this  claim  and  exercise  of  ages,  could  not  apply 
to  us,  as  an  independent  people.  If  the  right  was  claimed 
and  exercised  while  our  vessels  were  navigating  under  the 
British  flag,  it  could  not  authorize  the  same  claim  when  their 
owners  have  become  the  citizens  of  a  sovereign  state.  As  a 
relict  of  colonial  servitude,  whatever  may  be  the  claim  of 
Great  Britain,  it  surely  can  be  no  ground  for  contending  that 
it  is  entitled  to  our  submission. 

If  it  be  meant  that  the  right  has  been  claimed  and  exer- 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  203 

cised  for  ages  over  the  merchant  vessels  of  other  nations,  I 
apprehend  it  is  a  mistake.  The  case  never  occurred  with 
sufficient  frequency  to  constitute  even  a  practice,  much  less 
a  right.  If  it  had  been  either,  it  would  have  been  noticed  by 
some  of  the  writers  on  the  laws  of  nations.  The  truth  is,  the 
question  arose  out  of  American  independence  —  from  the 
severance  of  one  nation  into  two.  It  was  never  made  a 
question  between  any  other  nations.  There  is  therefore  no 
right  of  prescription. 

But,  it  seems,  it  has  also  been  claimed  and  exercised,  during 
the  whole  of  the  three  administrations  of  our  national  gov- 
ernment. And  is  it  meant  to  be  asserted  that  this  claim  and 
exercise  constitute  a  right?  If  it  is,  I  appeal  to  the  uniform, 
unceasing  and  urgent  remonstrances  of  the  three  adminis- 
trations —  I  appeal  not  only  to  the  warm  feelings,  but  cool 
justice  of  the  American  people  —  nay,  I  appeal  to  the  sound 
sense  and  honorable  sentiment  of  the  British  nation  itself, 
which,  however,  it  may  have  submitted  at  home  to  this  prac- 
tice, never  would  tolerate  its  sanction  by  law,  against  the 
assertion.  If  it  is  not,  how  can  it  be  affirmed  that  it  is  on  our 
part  a  mere  pretence? 

But  the  first  merchant  of  the  United  States,  in  answer  to 
Mr.  Pickering's  late  enquiries  has  informed  him  that  since 
the  affair  of  the  Chesapeake  there  has  been  no  cause  of  com- 
plaint —  that  he  could  not  find  a  single  instance  where  they 
had  taken  one  man  out  of  a  merchant  vessel.  Who  it  is,  that 
enjoys  the  dignity  of  first  merchant  of  the  United  States  we 
are  not  informed.1  But  if  he  had  applied  to  many  merchants 
in  Boston  as  respectable  as  any  in  the  United  States,  they 
could  have  told  him  of  a  valuable  vessel  and  cargo,  totally 
lost  upon  the  coast  of  England,  last  in  August  last,  and  solely 

1  It  was  William  Gray  of  Salem.    His  letter  to  Pickering,  making  the  statement 
about  impressments,  dated  January  8,  1808,  is  in  the  Pickering  Mss. 


204  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

in  consequence  of  having  had  two  of  her  men,  native  Amer- 
icans taken  from  her  by  impressment,  two  months  after  the 
affair  of  the  Chesapeake. 

On  the  1 5th  of  October,  the  king  of  England  issued  his 
proclamation,  commanding  his  naval  officers,  to  impress  his 
subjects  from  neutral  vessels.  This  proclamation  is  repre- 
sented as  merely  "requiring  the  return  of  his  subjects,  the 
seamen  especially,  from  foreign  countries,"  and  then  "it  is 
an  acknowledged  principle  that  every  nation  has  a  right  to 
the  service  of  its  subjects  in  time  of  war."  Is  this,  sir,  a 
correct  statement  either  of  the  proclamation,  or  of  the  ques- 
tion it  involves  in  which  our  right  is  concerned?  The  king 
of  England's  right  to  the  service  of  his  subjects  in  time  of  war 
is  nothing  to  us.  The  question  is,  whether  he  has  a  right  to 
seize  them  forcibly  on  board  of  our  vessels  while  under  con- 
tract of  service  to  our  citizens,  within  our  jurisdiction  upon 
the  high  seas?  And  whether  he  has  a  right  expressly  to  com- 
mand his  naval  officers  so  to  seize  them.  Is  this  an  acknowl- 
edged principle?  Certainly  not.  Why  then  is  this  proclama- 
tion described  as  founded  upon  uncontested  principle?  and 
why  is  the  command,  so  justly  offensive  to  us,  and  so  mis- 
chievous as  it  might  then  have  been  made  in  execution,  al- 
together omitted? 

But  it  is  not  the  taking  of  British  subjects  from  our  vessels, 
it  is  the  taking  under  color  of  that  pretence  of  our  own,  native 
American  citizens,  which  constitutes  the  most  galling  ag- 
gravation of  this  merciless  practice.  Yet  even  this,  we  are 
told  is  but  a  pretence  —  for  three  reasons. 

1.  Because  the  number  of  citizens  thus  taken  is  small. 

2.  Because  it  arises  only  from  the  impossibility  of  dis- 
tinguishing Englishmen  from  Americans. 

3.  Because,  such  impressed  American  citizens  are  deliv- 
ered up,  on  duly  authenticated  proof. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  205 

1.  Small  and  great  in  point  of  numbers  are  relative  terms. 
To  suppose  that  the  native  Americans  form  a  small  propor- 
tion of  the  whole  number  impressed  is  a  mistake.    The  re- 
verse is  the  fact.     Examine  the  official  returns  from  the 
Department  of  State.    They  give  the  names  of  between  four 
and  five  thousand  men  impressed  since  the  commencement 
of  the  present  war.    Of  which  number,  not  one-fifth  part  were 
British   subjects.     The  number  of  naturalized  Americans 
could  not  amount  to  one-tenth.    I  hazard  little  in  saying  that 
more  than  three-fourths  were  native  Americans.    If  it  be  said 
that  some  of  these  men,  though  appearing  on  the  face  of  the 
returns  American  citizens,  were  really  British  subjects,  and 
had  fraudulently  procured  their  protections;  I  reply  that 
this  number  must  be  far  exceeded  by  the  cases  of  citizens 
impressed,  which  never  reach  the  Department  of  State.    The 
American  consul  in  London  estimates  the  number  of  impress- 
ments during  the  war  at  nearly  three  times  the  amount  of 
the  names  returned.     If  the  nature  of  the  offence  be  consid- 
ered in  its  true  colors,  to  a  people  having  a  just  sense  of  per- 
sonal liberty  and  security,  it  is  in  every  single  instance,  of  a 
malignity  not  inferior  to  that  of  murder.     The  very  same 
act,  when  committed  by  the  recruiting  officer  of  one  nation 
within  the  territories  of  another,  is  by  the  universal  law  and 
usage  of  nations  punished  with  death.     Suppose  the  crime 
had  in  every  instance,  as  by  its  consequences  it  has  been  in 
many,  deliberate  murder.     Would  it  answer  or  silence  the 
voice  of  our  complaints  to  be  told  that  the  number  was 
small? 

2.  The  impossibility  of  distinguishing  English  from  Amer- 
ican seamen  is  not  the  only,  nor  even  the  most  frequent  oc- 
casion of  impressment.     Look  again  into  the  returns  from 
the  Department  of  State  —  you  will  see  that  the  officers 
take  our  men  without  pretending  to  enquire  where  they  were 


206  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

born;  sometimes  merely  to  show  their  animosity,  or  their 
contempt  for  our  country;  sometimes  from  the  wantonness 
of  power.  When  they  manifest  the  most  tender  regard  for  the 
neutral  rights  of  America,  they  lament  that  they  want  the 
men.  They  regret  the  necessity,  but  they  must  have  their 
complement.  When  we  complain  of  these  enormities,  we  are 
answered  that  the  acts  of  such  officers  were  unauthorized; 
that  the  commanders  of  men-of-war  are  an  unruly  set  of 
men,  for  whose  violence  their  own  government  cannot  always 
be  answerable,  that  enquiry  shall  be  made.  A  court  mar- 
tial is  sometimes  mentioned.  And  the  issue  of  Whitby's  1 
court  martial  has  taught  us  what  relief  is  to  be  expected  from 
that.  There  are  even  examples  I  am  told,  when  such  officers 
have  been  put  upon  the  yellow  list.  But  this  is  a  rare  excep- 
tion. The  ordinary  issue  when  the  act  is  disavowed,  is  the 
promotion  of  the  actor. 

3.  The  impressed  native  American  citizens  however,  upon 
duly  authenticated  proof  are  delivered  up.  Indeed!  how  un- 
reasonable then  were  complaint!  How  effectual  a  remedy 
for  the  wrong!  an  American  vessel,  bound  to  a  European 
port,  has  two,  three  or  four  native  Americans,  impressed  by 
a  British  man-of-war,  bound  to  the  East  or  West  Indies. 
When  the  American  captain  arrives  at  his  port  of  destina- 
tion he  makes  his  protest,  and  sends  it  to  the  nearest  Amer- 
ican minister  or  consul.  When  he  returns  home,  he  trans- 
mits the  duplicate  of  his  protest  to  the  Secretary  of  State. 
In  process  of  time,  the  names  of  the  impressed  men,  and  of 
the  ship  into  which  they  have  been  impressed,  are  received 
by  the  agent  in  London.  He  makes  his  demand  that  the 
men  may  be  delivered  up.  The  Lords  of  the  Admiralty,  after 
a  reasonable  time  for  enquiry  and  advisement,  return  for 
answer,  that  the  ship  is  on  a  foreign  station,  and  their 

1  Commander  of  the  Leander. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  207 

Lordships  can  therefore  take  no  further  steps  in  the  matter. 
Or,  that  the  ship  has  been  taken,  and  that  the  men  have 
been  received  in  exchange  for  French  prisoners.  Or,  that 
the  men  had  no  protections  (the  impressing  officers  often 
having  taken  them  from  the  men).  Or,  that  the  men  were 
probably  British  subjects.  Or  that  they  have  entered,  and 
taken  the  bounty;  (to  which  the  officers  know  how  to  reduce 
them).  Or,  that  they  have  been  married,  or  settled  in  Eng- 
land. In  all  these  cases,  without  further  ceremony,  their 
discharge  is  refused.  Sometimes,  their  Lordships,  in  a  vein 
of  humor,  inform  the  agent  that  the  man  has  been  discharged 
as  unserviceable.  Sometimes,  in  a  sterner  tone  they  say  he 
was  an  impostor.  Or  perhaps  by  way  of  consolation  to  his 
relatives  and  friends,  they  report  that  he  has  fallen  in  battle, 
against  nations  in  amity  with  his  country.  Sometimes  they 
coolly  return  that  there  is  no  such  man  on  board  the  ship;  and 
what  has  become  of  him,  the  agonies  of  a  wife  and  children 
in  his  native  land  may  be  left  to  conjecture.  When  all  these 
and  many  other  such  apologies  for  refusal  fail,  the  native 
American  seaman  is  discharged  —  and  when  by  the  chari- 
table aid  of  his  government  he  has  found  his  way  home,  he 
comes  to  be  informed,  that  all  is  as  it  should  be  —  that  the 
number  of  his  fellow-sufferers  is  small  —  that  it  was  impos- 
sible to  distinguish  him  from  an  Englishman  —  and  that  he 
was  delivered  up,  on  duly  authenticated  proof. 

Enough,  of  this  disgusting  subject.  I  cannot  stop  to  cal- 
culate how  many  of  these  wretched  victims  are  natives  of 
Massachusetts,  and  how  many  natives  of  Virginia.  I  cannot 
stop  to  solve  that  knotty  question  of  national  jurisprudence 
whether  some  of  them  might  not  possibly  be  slaves,  and  there- 
fore not  citizens  of  the  United  States.  I  cannot  stay  to  ac- 
count for  the  wonder,  why,  poor,  and  ignorant  and  friendless 
as  most  of  them  are,  the  voice  of  their  complaints  is  so  seldom 


208  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

heard  in  the  great  navigating  states.  I  admit  that  we  have 
endured  this  cruel  indignity,  through  all  the  administrations 
of  the  General  Government.  I  acknowledge  that  Britain 
claims  the  right  of  seizing  her  subjects  in  our  merchant  ves- 
sels, and  that  even  if  we  could  acknowledge  it,  the  line  of 
discrimination  would  be  difficult  to  draw.  We  are  not  in  a 
condition  to  maintain  this  right,  by  war;  and  as  the  British 
government  have  been  more  than  once  on  the  point  of  giving 
it  up  of  their  own  accord,  I  would  still  hope  for  the  day  when 
returning  justice  shall  induce  them  to  abandon  it,  without 
compulsion.  Her  subjects  we  do  not  want.  The  degree  of 
protection  which  we  are  bound  to  extend  to  them,  cannot 
equal  the  claim  of  our  own  citizens.  I  would  subscribe  to  any 
compromise  of  this  contest,  consistent  with  the  rights  of  sov- 
ereignty, the  duties  of  humanity,  and  the  principles  of  reci- 
procity: but  to  the  right  of  forcing  even  her  own  subjects  out 
of  our  merchant  vessels  on  the  high  seas  I  never  can  assent. 

The  second  point  upon  which  Mr.  Pickering  defends  the 
pretensions  of  Great  Britain,  is  her  denial  to  neutral  nations 
of  the  right  of  prosecuting  with  her  enemies  and  their  col- 
onies, any  commerce  from  which  they  are  excluded  in  time  of 
peace.  His  statement  of  this  case  adopts  the  British  doc- 
trine, as  sound.  The  right,  as  on  the  question  of  impress- 
ment, so  on  this,  it  surrenders  at  discretion  —  and  it  is 
equally  defective  in  point  of  fact. 

In  the  first  place,  the  claim  of  Great  Britain,  is  not  to  "a 
right  of  imposing  on  this  neutral  commerce  some  limits  and 
restraints"  but  of  interdicting  it  altogether,  at  her  pleasure; 
of  interdicting  it  without  a  moment's  notice  to  neutrals,  after 
solemn  decisions  of  her  courts  of  admiralty,  and  formal 
acknowledgments  of  her  ministers,  that  it  is  a  lawful  trade. 
And,  on  such  a  sudden,  unnotified  interdiction,  of  pouncing 
upon  all  neutral  commerce  navigating  upon  the  faith  of  her 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  209 

decisions  and  acknowledgments,  and  of  gorging  with  con- 
fiscation the  greediness  of  her  cruisers.  This  is  the  right 
claimed  by  Britain.  This  is  the  power  she  has  exercised. 
What  Mr.  Pickering  calls  "limits  and  restraints,"  she  calls 
relaxations  of  her  right. 

It  is  but  little  more  than  two  years,  since  this  question 
was  agitated  both  in  England  and  America,  with  as  much 
zeal,  energy  and  ability,  as  ever  was  displayed  upon  any  ques- 
tion of  national  law.  The  British  side  was  supported  by  Sir 
William  Scott,  Mr.  Ward,1  and  the  author  of  War  in  Dis- 
guise.2 But  even  in  Britain  their  doctrine  was  refuted  to 
demonstration  by  the  Edinburg  reviewers.  In  America,  the 
rights  of  our  country  were  maintained  by  numerous  writers 
profoundly  skilled  in  the  science  of  national  and  maritime 
law.  The  Answer  to  War  in  Disguise  was  ascribed  to  a 
gentleman 3  whose  talents  are  universally  acknowledged, 
and  who  by  his  official  situations  had  been  required  thor- 
oughly to  investigate  every  question  of  conflict  between 
neutral  and  belligerent  rights  which  has  occurred  in  the 
history  of  modern  war.  Mr.  Gore  and  Mr.  Pinkney,  our 
two  commissioners  at  London,  under  Mr.  Jay's  treaty,  the 
former,  in  a  train  of  cool  and  conclusive  argument  addressed 
to  Mr.  Madison,  the  latter  in  a  memorial  of  splendid  elo- 
quence from  the  merchants  of  Baltimore,  supported  the 
same  cause;  memorials,  drawn  by  lawyers  of  distinguished 
eminence,  by  merchants  of  the  highest  character,  and  by 
statesmen  of  long  experience  in  our  national  councils  from 
Salem,  from  Boston,  from  New  Haven,  from  New  York, 
and  from  Philadelphia,  together  with  remonstrances  to  the 
same  effect  from  Newburyport,  Newport,  Norfolk  and 

1  Robert  Plumer  Ward  (1765-1846). 

2  Sir  James  Stephen. 

3  Madison. 


210  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

Charleston.  This  accumulated  mass  of  legal  learning,  of 
commercial  information  and  of  national  sentiment  from  al- 
most every  inhabited  spot  upon  our  shores,  and  from  one 
extremity  of  the  Union  to  the  other,  confirmed  by  the  un- 
answered and  unanswerable  memorial  of  Mr.  Monroe  to  the 
British  minister,1  and  by  the  elaborate  research  and  irre- 
sistible reasoning  of  the  examination  of  the  British  doctrine, 
was  also  made  a  subject  of  full,  and  deliberate  discussion  in 
the  Senate  of  the  United  States.  A  committee  of  seven  mem- 
bers of  that  body,  after  three  weeks  of  arduous  investigation, 
reported  three  resolutions,  the  first  of  which  was  in  these 
words:  "Resolved,  that  the  capture  and  condemnation,  under 
the  orders  of  the  British  government,  and  adjudications  of 
their  courts  of  admiralty  of  American  vessels  and  their 
cargoes,  on  the  pretext  of  their  being  employed  in  a  trade 
with  the  enemies  of  Great  Britain,  prohibited  in  time  of 
peace,  is  an  unprovoked  aggression  upon  the  property  of  the 
citizens  of  these  United  States,  a  violation  of  their  neutral 
rights,  and  an  encroachment  upon  their  national  independ- 
ence" 2 

On  the  1 3th  of  February,  1806,  the  question  upon  the 
adoption  of  this  resolution,  was  taken  in  the  Senate.  The 
yeas  and  nays  were  required;  but  not  a  solitary  nay  was  heard 
in  answer.  It  was  adopted  by  the  unanimous  voice  of  all  the 
senators  present.  They  were  twenty-eight  in  number,  and 
among  them  stands  recorded  the  name  of  Mr.  Pickering. 

Let  us  remember  that  this  was  a  question  most  peculiarly 
and  immediately  of  commercial,  and  not  agricultural  interest; 
that  it  arose  from  a  call,  loud,  energetic  and  unanimous  from 
all  the  merchants  of  the  United  States  upon  Congress,  for 

1  September  23,  1805.    Printed  in  American  State  Papers,  Foreign  Relations,  II. 

734- 

2  Page  133,  supra. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  211 

the  national  interposition;  that  many  of  the  memorials  in- 
voked all  the  energy  of  the  legislature,  and  pledged  the  lives 
and  properties  of  the  memorialists  in  support  of  any  measures 
which  Congress  might  deem  necessary  to  vindicate  those 
rights.  Negotiation  was  particularly  recommended  from 
Boston,  and  elsewhere  —  negotiation  was  adopted  —  negotia- 
tion has  failed  —  and  now  Mr.  Pickering  tells  us  that  Great 
Britain  has  claimed  and  maintained  her  right!  He  argues 
that  her  claim  is  just  —  and  is  not  sparing  of  censure  upon 
those  who  still  consider  it  as  a  serious  cause  of  complaint. 
But  there  was  one  point  of  view  in  which  the  British  doc- 
trine on  this  question  was  then  only  considered  incidentally 
in  the  United  States  —  because  it  was  not  deemed  material 
for  the  discussion  of  our  rights.  We  examined  it  chiefly  as 
affecting  the  principles  as  between  a  belligerent  and  a  neutral 
power.  But  in  fact  it  was  an  infringement  of  the  rights  of 
war,  as  well  as  of  the  rights  of  peace.  It  was  an  unjustifiable 
enlargement  of  the  sphere  of  hostile  operations.  The  enemies 
of  Great  Britain  had  by  the  universal  law  of  nations  a  right 
to  the  benefits  of  neutral  commerce  within  their  dominions 
(subject  to  the  exceptions  of  actual  blockade  and  contraband) 
as  well  as  neutral  nations  had  a  right  to  trade  with  them. 
The  exclusion  from  that  commerce  by  this  new  principle  of 
warfare  which  Britain,  in  defiance  of  all  immemorial  national 
usages,  undertook  by  her  single  authority  to  establish,  but 
too  naturally  led  her  enemies  to  resort  to  new  and  extraor- 
dinary principles,  by  which  in  their  turn  they  might  re- 
taliate this  injury  upon  her.  The  pretence  upon  which 
Britain  in  the  first  instance  had  attempted  to  color  her  in- 
justice, was  a  miserable  fiction.  It  was  an  argument  against 
fact.  Her  reasoning  was,  that  a  neutral  vessel  by  mere  ad- 
mission in  time  of  war,  into  ports  from  which  it  would  have 
been  excluded  in  time  of  peace,  became  thereby  deprived  of 


212  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

its  national  character,  and  ipso  facto  was  transformed  into 
enemy's  property. 

Such  was  the  basis  upon  which  arose  the  far  famed  rule  of 
the  war  of  1756.  Such  was  the  foundation  upon  which 
Britain  claimed  and  maintained  this  supposed  right  of  adding 
that  new  instrument  of  desolation  to  the  horrors  of  war.  It 
was  distressing  to  her  enemy.  Yes!  Had  she  adopted  the 
practice  of  dealing  with  them  in  poison;  had  Mr.  Fox  ac- 
cepted the  services  of  the  man  who  offered  to  rid  him  of  the 
French  Emperor  by  assassination,  and  had  the  attempt  suc- 
ceeded, it  would  have  been  less  distressing  to  France  than 
this  rule  of  the  war  of  1756;  and  not  more  unjustifiable. 
Mr.  Fox  had  too  fair  a  mind  for  either,  but  his  compre- 
hensive and  liberal  spirit  was  discarded,  with  the  cabinet 
which  he  had  formed. 

It  has  been  the  struggle  of  reason  and  humanity,  and  above 
all  the  Christianity  for  two  thousand  years  to  mitigate  the 
rigors  of  that  scourge  of  human  kind,  war.  It  is  now  the 
struggle  of  Britain  to  aggravate  them.  Her  rule  of  the  war  of 
1756,  in  itself  and  in  its  effects,  was  one  of  the  deadliest 
poisons,  in  which  it  was  possible  for  her  to  tinge  the  weapons 
of  her  hostility. 

In  itself  and  in  its  effects,  I  say.  For  the  French  decrees  of 
Berlin  and  of  Milan,  the  Spanish  and  Dutch  decrees  of  the 
same  or  the  like  tenor,  and  her  own  orders  of  January  and 
November  —  these  alternations  of  licensed  pillage,  this  eager 
competition  between  her  and  her  enemies  for  the  honor  of 
giving  the  last  stroke  to  the  vitals  of  maritime  neutrality,  all 
are  justly  attributable  to  her  assumption  and  exercise  of  this 
single  principle.  The  rule  of  war  of  1756  was  the  root,  from 
which  all  the  rest  but  suckers,  still  at  every  shoot  growing 
ranker  in  luxuriance. 

In  the  last  decrees  of  France  and  Spain,  her  own  ingenious 


i8os]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  213 

fiction  is  adopted;  and  under  them,  every  neutral  vessel 
that  submits  to  English  search,  has  been  carried  into  an 
English  port,  or  paid  a  tax  to  the  English  government,  is  de- 
clared denationalized,  that  is  to  have  lost  her  national  char- 
acter, and  to  have  become  English  property.  This  is  cruel  in 
execution;  absurd  in  argument.  To  refute  it  were  folly,  for 
to  the  understanding  of  a  child  it  refutes  itself.  But  it  is 
the  reasoning  of  British  jurists.  It  is  the  simple  application 
to  the  circumstances  and  powers  of  France,  of  the  rule  of  the 
war  of  1756. 

I  am  not  the  apologist  of  France  and  Spain;  I  have  no 
national  partialities;  no  national  attachments  but  to  my 
own  country.  I  shall  never  undertake  to  justify  or  to  palliate 
the  insults  or  injuries  of  any  foreign  power  to  that  country 
which  is  dearer  to  me  than  life.  If  the  voice  of  reason  and  of 
justice  could  be  heard  by  France  and  Spain,  they  would 
say,  you  have  done  wrong  to  make  the  injustice  of  your 
enemy  towards  neutrals  the  measure  of  your  own.  If  she 
chastises  with  whips  do  not  you  chastise  with  scorpions. 
Whether  France  would  listen  to  this  language,  I  know  not. 
The  most  enormous  infractions  of  our  rights  hitherto  com- 
mitted by  her,  have  been  more  in  menace  than  in  accom- 
plishment. The  alarm  has  been  justly  great;  the  anticipa- 
tion threatening;  but  the  amount  of  actual  injury  small. 
But  to  Britain,  what  can  we  say?  If  we  attempt  to  raise  our 
voices,  her  minister  has  declared  to  Mr.  Pinkney  that  she 
will  not  hear.  The  only  reason  she  assigns  for  her  recent 
Orders  of  Council  is,  that  France  proceeds  on  the  same  prin- 
ciples. It  is  not  by  the  light  of  blazing  temples,  and  amid 
the  groans  of  women  and  children  perishing  in  the  ruins  of 
the  sanctuaries  of  domestic  habitation  at  Copenhagen,  that 
we  can  expect  our  remonstrances  against  this  course  of  pro- 
ceeding will  be  heard. 


2i4  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

Let  us  come  to  the  third  and  last  of  the  causes  of  com- 
plaint, which  are  represented  as  so  frivolous  and  so  un- 
founded —  "the  unfortunate  affair  of  the  Chesapeake"  The 
orders  of  Admiral  Berkeley,  under  which  this  outrage  was 
committed,  have  been  disavowed  by  his  government.  Gen- 
eral professions  of  a  willingness  to  make  reparation  for  it, 
have  been  lavished  in  profusion;  and  we  are  now  instructed 
to  take  these  professions  for  endeavors;  to  believe  them  sin- 
cere, because  his  Britannic  Majesty  sent  us  a  special  envoy; 
and  to  cast  the  odium  of  defeating  these  endeavors  upon  our 
own  government. 

I  have  already  told  you,  that  I  am  not  one  of  those  who 
deem  suspicion  and  distrust,  in  the  highest  order  of  political 
virtues.  Baseless  suspicion  is,  in  my  estimation,  a  vice,  as 
pernicious  in  the  management  of  public  affairs,  as  it  is  fatal 
to  the  happiness  of  domestic  life.  When,  therefore,  the 
British  ministers  have  declared  their  disposition  to  make 
ample  reparation  for  an  injury  of  a  most  atrocious  character, 
committed  by  an  officer  of  high  rank,  and,  as  they  say,  ut- 
terly without  authority,  I  should  most  readily  believe  them, 
were  their  professions  not  positively  contradicted  by  facts 
of  more  powerful  eloquence  than  words. 

Have  such  facts  occurred?  I  will  not  again  allude  to  the 
circumstances  of  Mr.  Rose's  departure  upon  his  mission  at 
such  a  precise  point  of  time,  that  his  commission  and  the 
Orders  of  Council  of  nth  November,  might  have  been 
signed  with  the  same  penful  of  ink.  The  subjects  were  not 
immediately  connected  with  each  other,  and  his  Majesty 
did  not  chuse  to  associate  distinct  topics  of  negotiation. 
The  attack  upon  the  Chesapeake  was  disavowed;  and  ample 
reparation  was  withheld  only,  because  with  the  demand  for 
satisfaction  upon  that  injury,  the  American  government  had 
coupled  a  demand  for  the  cessation  of  others;  alike  in  kind, 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  215 

but  of  minor  aggravation.  But  had  reparation  really  been 
intended,  would  it  not  have  been  offered,  not  in  vague  and 
general  terms,  but  in  precise  and  specific  proposals?  Were 
any  such  made?  None.  But  it  is  said  Mr.  Monroe  was  re- 
stricted from  negotiating  upon  this  subject  apart;  and  there- 
fore Mr.  Rose  was  to  be  sent  to  Washington;  charged  with 
this  single  object;  and  without  authority  to  treat  upon  or 
even  to  discuss  any  other.  Mr.  Rose  arrives.  The  Amer- 
ican government  readily  determine  to  treat  upon  the  Chesa- 
peake affair,  separately  from  all  others;  but  before  Mr.  Rose 
sets  his  foot  on  shore,  in  pursuance  of  a  pretension  made  be- 
fore by  Mr.  Canning,  he  connects  with  the  negotiation,  a  sub- 
ject far  more  distinct  from  the  butchery  of  the  Chesapeake, 
than  the  general  impressment  of  our  seamen,  I  mean  the 
proclamation,  interdicting  to  British  ships  of  war,  the  en- 
trance of  our  harbors. 

The  great  obstacle  which  has  always  interfered  in  the  ad- 
justment of  our  differences  with  Britain,  has  been  that  she 
would  not  acquiesce  in  the  only  principle  upon  which  fair 
negotiation  between  independent  nations  can  be  conducted, 
the  principle  of  reciprocity,  that  she  refuses  the  application 
to  us  of  the  claim  which  she  asserts  for  herself.  The  forcible 
taking  of  men  from  an  American  vessel,  was  an  essential 
part  of  the  outrage  upon  the  Chesapeake.  It  was  the  osten- 
sible purpose  for  which  that  act  of  war  unproclaimed,  was 
committed.  The  President's  proclamation  was  a  subsequent 
act,  and  was  avowedly  founded  upon  many  similar  aggres- 
sions, of  which  that  was  only  the  most  aggravated. 

If  then  Britain  could  with  any  color  of  reason  claim  that 
the  general  question  of  impressment  should  be  laid  out  of  the 
case  altogether,  she  ought  upon  the  principle  of  reciprocity 
to  have  laid  equally  out  of  the  case,  the  proclamation,  a 
measure  so  easily  separable  from  it,  and  in  its  nature  merely 


216  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

defensive.  When  therefore  she  made  the  repeal  of  the 
proclamation  an  indispensable  preliminary  to  all  discussion 
upon  the  nature  and  extent  of  that  reparation  which  she 
had  offered,  she  refused  to  treat  with  us  upon  the  footing  of 
an  independent  power.  She  insisted  upon  an  act  of  self- 
degradation  on  our  part,  before  she  would  even  tell  us,  what 
redress  she  would  condescend  to  grant  for  a  great  and 
acknowledged  wrong.  This  was  a  condition  which  she  could 
not  but  know  to  be  inadmissible,  and  is  of  itself  proof  nearly 
conclusive  that  her  cabinet  never  intended  to  make  for  that 
wrong  any  reparation  at  all. 

But  this  is  not  all.  It  cannot  be  forgotten  that  when  that 
atrocious  deed  was  committed,  amidst  the  general  burst  of 
indignation  which  resounded  from  every  part  of  this  Union, 
there  were  among  us  a  small  number  of  persons,  who  upon 
the  opinion  that  Berkeley's  orders  were  authorized  by  his 
government,  undertook  to  justify  them  in  their  fullest  ex- 
tent. These  ideas  probably  first  propagated  by  British 
official  characters,  in  this  country,  were  persisted  in  until  the 
disavowal  of  the  British  government  took  away  the  necessity 
for  persevering  in  them,  and  gave  notice  where  the  next 
position  was  to  be  taken.  This  patriotic  reasoning  however 
had  been  so  satisfactory  at  Halifax,  that  complimentary 
letters  were  received  from  Admiral  Berkeley  himself  highly 
approving  the  spirit  in  which  they  were  inculcated,  and  re- 
marking how  easily  peace,  between  the  United  States  and 
Britain  might  be  preserved,  if  that  measure  of  our  national 
rights  could  be  made  the  prevailing  standard  of  the  country. 

When  the  news  arrived  in  England,  although  the  general 
sentiment  of  the  nation  was  not  prepared  for  the  formal 
avowal  and  justification  of  this  unparalleled  aggression,  yet 
there  were  not  wanting  persons  there,  ready  to  claim  and 
maintain  the  right  of  searching  national  ships  for  deserters. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  217 

It  was  said  at  the  time,  but  for  this  we  must  of  course  rest 
upon  the  credit  of  inofficial  authority,  to  have  been  made  a 
serious  question  in  the  Cabinet  Council;  nor  was  its  deter- 
mination there  ascribed  to  the  eloquence  of  the  gentleman 
who  became  the  official  organ  of  its  communication.  Add  to 
this  a  circumstance,  which  without  claiming  irrefragable 
credence  of  a  diplomatic  note,  has  yet  its  weight  upon  the 
common  sense  of  mankind;  that  in  all  the  daily  newspapers 
known  to  be  in  the  ministerial  interest,  Berkeley  was  justi- 
fied and  applauded  in  every  variety  of  form  that  publication 
could  assume,  excepting  only  that  of  official  proclamation. 
The  only  part  of  his  orders  there  disapproved  was  the  re- 
ciprocal offer  which  he  made  of  submitting  his  own  ships  to 
be  searched  in  return  —  that  was  very  unequivocally  dis- 
claimed. The  ruffian  right  of  superior  force,  was  the  solid 
base  upon  which  the  claim  was  asserted,  and  so  familiar  was 
this  argument  grown  to  the  casuists  of  British  national  juris- 
prudence, that  the  right  of  a  British  man-of-war  to  search  an 
American  frigate,  was  to  them  a  self-evident  proof  against 
the  right  of  the  American  frigate  to  search  the  British  man-of- 
war.  The  same  tone  has  been  constantly  kept  up,  until  our 
accounts  of  latest  date;  and  have  been  recently  further  in- 
vigorated by  a  very  explicit  call  for  war  with  the  United 
States,  which  they  contend  could  be  of  no  possible  injury  to 
Britain,  and  which  they  urge  upon  the  ministry  as  affording 
them  an  excellent  opportunity  to  accomplish  a  dismember- 
ment of  this  Union.  These  sentiments  have  even  been 
avowed  in  Parliament,  where  the  nobleman  who  moved  the 
address  of  the  house  of  Lords  in  answer  to  the  king's  speech, 
declared  that  the  right  of  searching  national  ships,  ought  to 
be  maintained  against  the  Americans,  and  disclaimed  only 
with  respect  to  European  sovereigns. 

In  the  meantime  Admiral  Berkeley,  by  a  court  martial  of 


2i8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

his  own  subordinate  officers,  hung  one  of  the  men  taken  from 
the  Chesapeake,  and  called  his  name  Jenkin  Ratford.  There 
was,  according  to  the  answer  so  frequently  given  by  the  Lords 
of  the  Admiralty,  upon  applications  for  the  discharge  of  im- 
pressed Americans,  no  such  man  on  board  the  ship.  The  man 
thus  executed  had  been  taken  from  the  Chesapeake  by  the 
name  of  Wilson.  It  is  said  that  on  his  trial  he  was  identified 
by  one  or  two  witnesses  who  knew  him,  and  that  before  he 
was  turned  off  he  confessed  his  name  to  be  Ratford  and  that 
he  was  born  in  England.  But  it  has  also  been  said  that  Rat- 
ford  is  now  living  in  Pennsylvania;  and  after  the  character 
which  the  disavowal  of  Admiral  Berkeley's  own  government 
has  given  to  his  conduct,  what  confidence  can  be  claimed  or 
due  to  the  proceedings  of  a  court  martial  of  his  associates  held 
to  sanction  his  proceedings.  The  three  other  men  had  not 
even  been  demanded  in  his  orders.  They  were  taken  by  the 
sole  authority  of  the  British  searching  lieutenant,  after  the 
surrender  of  the  Chesapeake.  There  was  not  the  shadow  of  a 
pretence  before  the  court  martial  that  they  were  British 
subjects,  or  born  in  any  of  the  British  dominions.  Yet  by 
this  court  martial  they  were  sentenced  to  suffer  death.  They 
were  reprieved  from  execution,  only  upon  condition  of  re- 
nouncing their  rights  as  Americans  by  voluntary  service  in 
the  king's  ships.  They  have  never  been  restored.  To  com- 
plete the  catastrophe  with  which  this  bloody  tragedy  was 
concluded,  Admiral  Berkeley  himself  in  sanctioning  the 
doom  of  these  men,  thus  obtained,  thus  tried,  and  thus 
sentenced,  read  them  a  grave  moral  lecture  on  the  enormity 
of  their  crime,  in  its  tendency  to  provoke  a  war  between  the 
United  States  and  Great  Britain. 

Yet  amidst  all  this  parade  of  disavowal  by  his  govern- 
ment —  amidst  all  these  professions  of  readiness  to  make 
reparation,  not  a  single  mark  of  the  slightest  disapprobation 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  219 

appears  ever  to  have  been  manifested  to  that  officer.  His 
instructions  were  executed  upon  the  Chesapeake  in  June. 
Rumors  of  his  recall  have  been  circulated  here.  But  on 
leaving  the  station  at  Halifax  in  December,  he  received  a 
complimentary  address  from  the  colonial  assembly,  and 
assured  them  in  answer,  that  he  had  no  official  information  of 
his  recall.  From  thence  he  went  to  the  West  Indies;  and  on 
leaving  Bermuda  for  England  in  February  was  addressed 
again  by  that  colonial  government,  in  terms  of  high  panegyric 
upon  his  energy,  with  manifest  allusion  to  his  achievement 
upon  the  Chesapeake. 

Under  all  these  circumstances,  without  applying  any  of 
the  maxims  of  a  suspicious  policy  to  the  British  professions, 
I  may  still  be  permitted  to  believe  that  their  ministry  never 
seriously  intended  to  make  us  honorable  reparation,  or  in- 
deed any  reparation  at  all  for  that  "unfortunate  affair." 

It  is  impossible  for  any  man  to  form  an  accurate  idea  of 
the  British  policy  towards  the  United  States,  without  taking 
into  consideration  the  state  of  parties  in  that  government, 
and  the  views,  characters  and  opinions  of  the  individuals  at 
their  helm  of  state.  A  liberal  and  a  hostile  policy  towards 
America,  are  among  the  strongest  marks  of  distinction  be- 
tween the  political  systems  of  the  rival  statesmen  of  that 
kingdom.  The  liberal  party  are  reconciled  to  our  independ- 
ence; and  though  extremely  tenacious  of  every  right  of  their 
own  country,  are  systematically  disposed  to  preserve  peace 
with  the  United  States.  Their  opponents  harbor  sentiments 
of  a  very  different  description.  Their  system  is  coercion. 
Their  object  the  recovery  of  their  lost  dominion  in  North 
America.  This  party  now  stands  high  in  power.  Although 
Admiral  Berkeley  may  never  have  received  written  orders 
from  them  for  his  enterprise  upon  the  Chesapeake,  yet  in 
giving  his  instructions  to  the  squadron  at  Norfolk,  he  knew 


220  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

full  well  under  what  administration  he  was  acting.  Every 
measure  of  that  administration  towards  us  since  that  time 
has  been  directed  to  the  same  purpose — to  break  down  the 
spirit  of  our  national  independence.  Their  purpose,  as  far 
as  it  can  be  collected  from  their  acts,  is  to  force  us  into  war 
with  them  or  with  their  enemies;  to  leave  us  only  the  bitter 
alternative  of  their  vengeance  or  their  protection. 

Both  these  parties  are  no  doubt  willing,  that  we  should 
join  them  in  the  war  of  their  nation  against  France  and  her 
allies.  The  late  administration  would  have  drawn  us  into 
it  by  treaty,  the  present  are  attempting  it  by  compulsion. 
The  former  would  have  admitted  us  as  allies,  the  latter  will 
have  us  no  otherwise  than  as  colonists.  On  the  late  debates 
in  Parliament,  the  Lord  Chancellor  freely  avowed  that  the 
Orders  of  Council  of  nth  November  were  intended  to  make 
America  at  last  sensible  of  the  policy  of  joining  England 
against  France. 

This  too,  sir,  is  the  substantial  argument  of  Mr.  Pickering's 
letter.  The  suspicions  of  a  design  in  our  own  administration 
to  plunge  us  into  a  war  with  Britain,  I  never  have  shared. 
Our  administration  have  every  interest  and  every  motive 
that  can  influence  the  conduct  of  man  to  deter  them  from 
any  such  purpose.  Nor  have  I  seen  anything  in  their  meas- 
ures bearing  the  slightest  indication  of  it.  But  between  a 
design  of  war  with  England,  and  a  surrender  of  our  national 
freedom  for  the  sake  of  war  with  the  rest  of  Europe,  there  is 
a  material  difference.  This  is  the  policy  now  in  substance 
recommended  to  us,  and  for  which  the  interposition  of  the 
commercial  States  is  called.  For  this,  not  only  are  all  the 
outrages  of  Britain  to  be  forgotten,  but  the  very  assertion 
of  our  rights  is  to  be  branded  with  odium.  Impressment. 
Neutral  trade.  British  taxation.  Everything  that  can  dis- 
tinguish a  state  of  national  freedom  from  a  state  of  national 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  221 

vassalage,  is  to  be  surrendered  at  discretion.  In  the  face  of 
every  fact  we  are  told  to  believe  every  profession.  In  the 
midst  of  every  indignity,  we  are  pointed  to  British  protection 
as  our  only  shield  against  the  universal  conqueror.  Every 
phantom  of  jealousy  and  fear  is  evoked.  The  image  of 
France  with  a  scourge  in  her  hand  is  impressed  into  the 
service,  to  lash  us  into  the  refuge  of  obedience  to  Britain. 
Insinuations  are  even  made  that  if  Britain  "with  her  thou- 
sand ships  of  war,"  has  not  destroyed  our  commerce,  it  has 
been  owing  to  her  indulgence,  and  we  are  almost  threatened 
in  her  name  with  the  "destruction  of  our  fairest  cities." 

Not  one  act  of  hostility  to  Britain  has  been  committed  by 
us,  she  has  not  a  pretence  of  that  kind  to  allege.  But  if  she 
will  wage  war  upon  us,  are  we  to  do  nothing  in  our  own  de- 
fence? If  she  issues  orders  of  universal  plunder  upon  our 
commerce,  are  we  not  to  withhold  it  from  her  grasp?  Is 
American  pillage  one  of  those  rights  which  she  has  claimed 
and  exercised  until  we  are  foreclosed  from  any  attempt  to 
obstruct  its  collection?  For  what  purpose  are  we  required 
to  make  this  sacrifice  of  every  thing  that  can  give  value  to  the 
name  of  freemen,  this  abandonment  of  the  very  right  of  self- 
preservation?  Is  it  to  avoid  a  war?  Alas!  Sir,  it  does  not 
offer  even  this  plausible  plea  for  pusillanimity.  For,  as  sub- 
mission would  make  us  to  all  substantial  purposes  British 
colonies,  her  enemies  would  unquestionably  treat  us  as  such, 
and  after  degrading  ourselves  into  voluntary  servitude  to 
escape  a  war  with  her,  we  should  incur  inevitable  war  with  all 
her  enemies,  and  be  doomed  to  share  the  destinies  of  her 
conflict  with  a  world  in  arms. 

Between  this  unqualified  submission,  and  offensive  re- 
sistance against  the  war  upon  maritime  neutrality  waged 
by  the  concurring  decrees  of  all  the  great  belligerent  powers, 
the  embargo  was  adopted,  and  has  been  hitherto  continued. 


222  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

So  far  was  it  from  being  dictated  by  France,  that  it  was  cal- 
culated to  withdraw,  and  has  withdrawn  from  within  her 
reach  all  the  means  of  compulsion  which  her  subsequent 
decrees  would  have  put  in  her  possession.  It  has  added  to 
the  motives  both  of  France  and  England,  for  preserving 
peace  with  us,  and  has  diminished  their  inducements  to 
war.  It  has  lessened  their  capacities  of  inflicting  injury  upon 
us,  and  given  us  some  preparation  for  resistance  to  them.  It 
has  taken  from  their  violence  the  lure  of  interest.  It  has 
dashed  the  philter  of  pillage  from  the  lips  of  rapine.  That 
it  is  distressing  to  ourselves  —  that  it  calls  for  the  fortitude 
of  a  people,  determined  to  maintain  their  rights,  is  not  to  be 
denied.  But  the  only  alternative  was  between  that  and  war. 
Whether  it  will  yet  save  us  from  that  calamity,  cannot  be 
determined,  but  if  not,  it  will  prepare  us  for  the  further 
struggle  to  which  we  may  be  called.  Its  double  tendency  of 
promoting  peace  and  preparing  for  war,  in  its  operation  upon 
both  the  belligerent  rivals,  is  the  great  advantage,  which 
more  than  outweighs  all  its  evils. 

If  any  statesman  can  point  out  another  alternative,  I  am 
ready  to  hear  him,  and  for  any  practicable  expedient  to  lend 
him  every  possible  assistance.  But  let  not  that  expedient 
be,  submission  to  trade  under  British  licenses,  and  British 
taxation.  We  are  told  that  even  under  these  restrictions  we 
may  yet  trade  to  the  British  dominions,  to  Africa  and  China, 
and  with  the  colonies  of  France,  Spain,  and  Holland.  I  ask 
not,  how  much  of  this  trade  would  be  left,  when  our  inter- 
course with  the  whole  continent  of  Europe  being  cut  off  would 
leave  us  no  means  of  purchase,  and  no  market  for  sale?  I 
ask  not,  what  trade  we  could  enjoy  with  the  colonies  of  na- 
tions with  which  we  should  be  at  war?  I  ask  not,  how  long 
Britain  would  leave  open  to  us  avenues  of  trade,  which  even 
in  these  very  orders  of  Council,  she  boasts  of  leaving  open  as 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  223 

a  special  indulgence?  If  we  yield  the  principle,  we  abandon 
all  pretence  to  national  sovereignty.  To  yearn  for  the  frag- 
ments of  trade  which  might  be  left,  would  be  to  pine  for  the 
crumbs  of  commercial  servitude.  The  boon,  which  we  should 
humiliate  ourselves  to  accept  from  British  bounty,  would 
soon  be  withdrawn.  Submission  never  yet  set  boundaries  to 
encroachment.  From  pleading  for  half  the  empire,  we  should 
sink  into  supplicants  for  life.  We  should  supplicate  in  vain. 
If  we  must  fall,  let  us  fall,  freemen.  If  we  must  perish,  let 
it  be  in  defence  of  our  RIGHTS. 

To  conclude,  sir,  I  am  not  sensible  of  any  necessity  for 
the  extraordinary  interference  of  the  commercial  States,  to 
control  the  general  councils  of  the  nation.  If  any  inter- 
ference could  at  this  critical  extremity  of  our  affairs  have  a 
kindly  effect  upon  our  common  welfare,  it  would  be  an  inter- 
ference to  promote  union  and  not  a  division  —  to  urge  mu- 
tual confidence,  and  not  universal  distrust  —  to  strengthen 
the  arm  and  not  to  relax  the  sinews  of  the  nation.  Our 
suffering  and  our  dangers,  though  differing  perhaps  in  degree, 
are  universal  in  extent.  As  their  causes  are  justly  chargeable, 
so  their  removal  is  dependent  not  upon  ourselves,  but  upon 
others.  But  while  the  spirit  of  independence  shall  continue 
to  beat  in  unison  with  the  pulses  of  the  nation,  no  danger  will 
be  truly  formidable.  Our  duties  are,  to  prepare  with  con- 
certed energy,  for  those  which  threaten  us,  to  meet  them 
without  dismay,  and  to  rely  for  their  issue  upon  heaven. 

I  am,  etc.1 

1  A  series  of  articles  in  reply  to  this  letter  appeared  in  The  Repertory,  beginning 
April  22.  In  the  New  York  Evening  Post,  William  Coleman  attacked  the  letter  and 
its  author  in  scathing  terms,  and  some  in  Boston  reprinted  the  articles,  with  others 
from  other  sources,  in  a  pamphlet:  Remarks  and  Criticisms  on  the  Hon.  John  Quincy 
Adams's  Letter  to  the  Hon.  Harrison  Gray  Otis,  Boston,  1808.  The  preface  to  this 
pamphlet  contained  the  following  sentences:  "It  is  left  to  literary  men  to  decide 
whether  the  Honorable  Senator  has  not  been  overrated  as  a  scholar;  and  to  politi- 


224  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1824 

APPENDIX1 

July  27,  1824. 

On  the  1 8th  of  December,  1807,  Mr.  Jefferson  sent  a  confidential 
message  to  both  houses  of  Congress,  recommending  an  immediate 
embargo;  and  enclosing  two  documents,  one  of  which  was  a  recent 
proclamation  of  the  king  of  Great  Britain,  authorizing  and  com- 
manding the  impressment  by  his  naval  officers,  of  British  seamen 
from  neutral  merchant  vessels,  and  the  other  a  correspondence 
between  General  Armstrong,  then  our  minister  in  France,  and 
the  French  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Champagny,  showing  that 
the  Emperor  Napoleon  had  finally  determined  to  carry  into  full 
execution,  without  regard  to  the  treaty  between  the  United  States 
and  France,  his  Berlin  decree  of  2ist  November,  1806,  which  had 
for  some  months  after  it  was  issued,  been  suspended  with  regard 
to  the  vessels  of  the  United  States. 

The  attack  by  a  British  squadron  upon  our  frigate  Chesapeake, 

cians,  whether  he  has  not  disappointed  them  as  a  statesman.  If  he  has  been  flat- 
tered, admired  and  trusted  beyond  his  merit,  it  has  been  his  misfortune;  and  if  all 
is  now  left  that  justly  belongs  to  him,  he  cannot  complain."  The  language  employed 
by  some  called  out  rebukes  even  from  their  own  following.  For  example,  of  "Al- 
fred's" Letter  to  J.  Q.  Adams,  the  federalist  Repertory  said,  the  writer  had  "indulged 
in  a  strain  of  such  bitter  invective,  and  manifested  such  a  disposition  to  belittle  the 
object  of  his  reprehension,  that  we  can  say  with  confidence,  the  most  decided  among 
federalists  will  not  subscribe  to  this  mode  of  attack.  It  will  be  to  them  a  cause  of 
regret,  and  to  the  repudiated  senator  a  source  of  satisfaction."  June  21,  1808.  A 
writer  "Marcellus"  in  the  Independent  Chronicle,  March  17,  reviewed  Pickering's 
letter,  and  in  a  reissue  of  this  article  a  brief  introductory  paragraph  said:  "The  style 
and  principles  of  the  writer  strongly  mark  it  as  the  production  of  the  independent 
and  patriotic  John  Quincy  Adams,  Esq.,  one  of  our  Senators  in  Congress."  There 
is,  however,  no  evidence  that  Adams  had  any  share  in  the  "Marcellus"  contribu- 
tions, of  which  this  particular  article  was  No.  25.  A  long  list  of  the  replies,  endorse- 
ments, criticisms  and  reviews  called  out  by  this  letter  could  be  compiled,  but 
would  be  of  little  interest. 

1  In  the  summer  of  1824,  a  publisher  in  Baltimore,  Maryland,  proposed  to  reissue 
the  Letter  to  Mr.  Otis,  and  this  was  done  after  Adams  had  contributed  this  "Ap- 
pendix." It  was  printed  at  the  office  of  the  Baltimore  Patriot. 


i824]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  225 

had  very  recently  occurred,  in  consequence  of  which  all  British 
armed  vessels  had  been  interdicted  from  entering  the  ports  of  the 
United  States.  The  British  Orders  in  Council  of  nth  November, 
1807,  professedly  retaliatory  upon  the  French  decree  of  Berlin, 
had  issued  and  were  already  announced  in  the  newspapers  of  the 
United  States,  though  not  yet  officially  authenticated.  The  gen- 
eral state  of  our  commercial  affairs  was  momentous  and  full  of 
alarm.  The  British  government  had  disavowed  the  attack  upon 
the  Chesapeake,  but  instead  of  giving  immediate  satisfaction  for  it, 
had  appointed  Mr.  Rose  to  come  out  upon  a  mission  of  subterfuge 
and  prevarication  concerning  it,  and  at  the  same  moment  had  issued 
without  notification  either  to  the  government  of  the  United  States, 
or  to  their  minister  in  London,  the  Orders  in  Council,  which  but 
for  the  embargo,  would,  while  Mr.  Rose  was  amusing  us  with  the 
fragrance  of  his  diplomacy,  have  swept  three-fourths  of  the  ton- 
nage of  the  United  States  into  the  ports  of  Great  Britain  for  con- 
fiscation. 

It  was  in  this  state  of  things  that  the  message  recommending 
the  embargo  was  received  and  discussed,  in  secret  session,  by  the 
Senate.  The  only  motive  for  debating  it  with  closed  doors  was 
the  necessity,  if  the  measure  recommended  was  deemed  proper,  of 
adopting  it  immediately.  Every  hour  of  debate  tended  to  defeat 
the  object  of  the  message.  For  the  instant  it  should  be  known  in 
the  commercial  cities  that  an  embargo  was  impending,  the  spirit  of 
desperate  adventure  would  have  rushed  to  sea,  with  every  plank 
that  could  have  been  made  to  float;  and  the  delay  of  a  week  in 
deliberation,  instead  of  sheltering  the  property  of  our  merchants 
from  depredation,  would  only  have  cast  it  forth  upon  the  waters 
to  be  intercepted  by  the  cruisers  of  both  the  combating  nations. 

The  message  was  referred,  in  Senate,  to  a  committee  of  five,  of 
which  General  Samuel  Smith,  himself  an  eminent  merchant, 
brother  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  and  in  the  full  confidence  of 
Mr.  Jefferson,  was  chairman,  and  of  which  I  was  a  member.  The 
chairman  proposed  to  the  committee,  to  report  a  bill  in  compliance 
with  the  recommendation  of  the  message.  I  objected  that  the 


226  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1824 

two  documents  with  the  message  were  not  sufficient  to  justify  so 
strong  and  severe  a  measure  as  an  embargo;  and  enquired,  whether 
besides  the  general  notoriety  of  the  dangers,  mentioned  in  the 
message,  the  executive  had  other  reasons  for  the  measure,  which  it 
might  not  be  convenient  to  assign.  The  chairman  said,  it  was  ex- 
pected and  hoped  that  the  act  would  have  a  favorable  effect,  to 
aid  the  executive  in  the  negotiation  with  Mr.  Rose;  and  also  that 
it  was  intended  as  a  substitution  for  the  non-importation  act, 
which  had  passed  on  the  i8th  of  April,  1806,  but  pending  the  nego- 
tiations had  been  suspended  until  the  I4th  of  December,  1807,  only 
four  days  before  the  message.  This  act  was  itself  nearly  equivalent 
to  a  total  commercial  non-intercourse  with  Great  Britain;  and  to 
have  repealed,  or  longer  suspended  it  at  that  time,  would  have  been 
a  surrender  at  discretion,  upon  all  the  subjects  of  controversy, 
then  in  so  high  a  state  of  aggravation,  with  that  power.  To  these 
reasons  I  yielded,  and  the  bill  for  laying  the  embargo  was  reported 
to  the  Senate  with  the  unanimous  consent  of  the  committee. 

The  bill  was  opposed  in  the  Senate,  very  feebly  upon  its  merits, 
and  exclusively  by  the  federal  members,  then  only  four  in  number. 
The  principal  effort  made  by  them  was  to  obtain  delay,  which 
would,  as  has  been  shown,  have  defeated  in  a  great  measure  the  ob- 
ject of  the  bill.  They  obtained  against  the  bill  only  the  vote  of 
Mr.  Maclay  of  Pennsylvania,  and  of  Mr.  Crawford,  then  a  new 
member,  but  who  afterwards  constantly  supported  the  adherence 
of  the  administration  to  the  act,  as  long  as  it  was  continued. 

In  assigning  to  the  Senate  very  briefly  my  reasons  for  assenting 
to  the  bill,  and  for  the  belief  that  it  ought  to  pass  without  delay,  I 
admitted  that  the  two  documents  transmitted  with  the  message, 
would  not  have  been  of  themselves,  to  my  mind,  sufficient  to  war- 
rant the  measure  recommended  in  it;  but  referring  to  the  existing 
state  of  things,  of  public  notoriety,  and  denominated  in  the  message 
"the  present  crisis"  I  observed  that  the  executive,  having  recom- 
mended the  measure  upon  his  responsibility,  had  doubtless  other 
reasons  for  it  which  I  was  persuaded  were  satisfactory;  that  with 
this  view,  convinced  of  the  expediency  of  the  bill,  I  was  also  im- 


i824]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  227 

pressed  with  the  necessity  of  its  immediate  adoption;  that  it  was 
a  time,  not  for  deliberation  but  for  action;  and  that  I  wished  the 
bill,  instead  of  lingering  through  the  dilatory  process  of  ordinary 
legislation,  might  pass  through  all  the  stages  of  its  enactment  in  a 
single  day.  With  these  views  a  decided  majority  of  the  Senate  con- 
curred. The  rule  which  required  that  bills  should  be  read  three 
times  on  three  different  days,  was  suspended;  all  motions  of  post- 
ponement were  discarded,  and  the  bill  was  passed  in  the  Senate  by 
a  vote  of  twenty-two  to  six. 

My  allusion  to  the  recommendation  of  the  executive  upon  his 
responsibility  and  to  my  confidence  in  it,  was  purposely  made  in 
general  terms;  but  it  had  reference  to  the  reasons  which  had  been 
assigned  to  me  in  the  committee,  by  the  chairman.  I  deemed  it 
less  necessary  to  specify  them,  because  as  I  have  observed,  the 
opposition  to  the  bill  upon  its  merits  was  exceedingly  feeble; 
scarcely  calling  for  an  answer. 

About  two  months  after  the  embargo  had  been  enacted,  and 
while  it  was  bearing  with  severe  pressure  upon  the  commercial, 
navigating  and  fishing  interests  of  the  north,  Mr.  Pickering  wrote  a 
letter  to  the  governor  of  Massachusetts,  for  communication  to  the 
legislature,  denouncing  the  executive  and  Congress  of  the  United 
States,  for  passing  the  embargo;  and  calling  for  the  interposition 
of  the  commercial  states  to  save  the  country  from  ruin.  The  gov- 
ernor sent  it  back  to  him,  with  a  letter  of  rebuke  for  expecting 
him  to  make  such  a  communication  to  the  legislature.1  Mr.  Pick- 
ering, apprehensive,  as  he  says,  that  he  should  not  obtain  his  ob- 
ject through  the  governor,  sent  a  copy  to  his  excellent  friend, 
George  Cabot,  (since  President  of  the  Hartford  Convention,)  who 
after  waiting  a  few  days,  finding  that  the  original  was  not  com- 
municated to  the  legislature,  sent  a  copy  to  the  printer. 

The  governor  of  Massachusetts,  in  his  answer  to  Mr.  Pickering, 
had  stated  that  my  opinion  had  been  and  still  was  in  favor  of  the 
embargo.  Mr.  Pickering  replied,  and  in  terms  supplied  by  his 

1  Interesting  Correspondence  between  his  Excellency  Governour  Sullivan  and  Col. 
Pickering,  Boston,  1808. 


228  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1824 

feelings  at  the  time,  charged  me  with  having  in  the  debate  on  the 
embargo,  expressed  a  sentiment  which  resolved  the  whole  business 
of  legislation  into  the  will  of  the  executive.  To  support  the  charge, 
he  quoted  several  words,  which  he  said  I  had  used  in  the  debate, 
and  which  detached  from  this  context,  and  from  the  explanation  I 
have  now  given,  might  deserve  all  the  severity  of  his  commentary.1 

1  "In  opposing  a  postponement,  to  obtain  further  information,  and  to  consider  a 
measure  of  such  moment,  of  such  universal  concern,  Adams  made  this  declaration: 
'The  President  has  recommended  the  measure  on  his  high  responsibility:  I  would 
not  consider  —  I  would  not  deliberate:  I  would  act.  Doubtless  the  President  pos- 
sesses such  further  information  as  will  justify  the  measure'!  "  Pickering  to  Sullivan, 
April  22,  1808;  he  repeated  it  in  his  Address  to  the  People  of  the  United  States 
(No.  XIV),  printed  in  the  Salem  Gazette,  and  in  pamphlet;  and  again  in  his  Review 
of  the  Adams-Cunningham  correspondence,  adding,  "This  sentiment  was  so  ex- 
traordinary, that  I  instantly  wrote  it  down." 

In  the  Adams  Mss.  is  an  undated  draught  of  a  letter  to  the  Editors  of  the  New 
England  Palladium:  "You  are  requested  to  state  to  the  public  that  Mr.  John 
Quincy  Adams  never  said  in  the  Senate  of  the  United  States  that  he  'would  not 
deliberate.'  He  confidently  believes  that  he  never  used  the  words.  He  is  certain 
that  if  he  did  use  them,  it  was  in  connection  with  others  which  gave  them  a  mean- 
ing entirely  different  from  that  which  has  been  imputed  to  him.  The  sentiments 
which  he  did  express  were  these: 

"That  the  general  accounts  from  France  and  England  proved  that  the  commerce 
and  seamen  of  the  United  States  were  threatened  with  the  most  imminent  dangers. 
That  besides  the  official  documents  sent  with  the  President's  message  recommend- 
ing the  embargo,  that  officer  might  perhaps  have  received  information  which  could 
not  be  communicated  to  Congress,  but  which  might  concur  with  the  official  papers 
in  producing  the  recommendation  in  the  message.  That  under  those  circumstances, 
whatever  doubts  might  have  remained  upon  his  mind,  on  considering  only  those  two 
papers,  he  could  not  allow  them  to  weigh  against  the  express  recommendation  of  the 
first  magistrate,  upon  his  high  responsibility  to  the  nation.  That  he  could  not 
justify  it  to  himself  or  his  country,  if  in  such  a  state  of  things  he  should  refuse  his 
assent  to  the  measure  thus  required.  That  having  come  to  this  conclusion,  he  was 
against  postponing  the  final  decision  of  the  question  in  Senate  to  another  day.  For  if 
another  day  should  be  consumed  in  discussing  the  question  in  Senate,  it  being  then 
Friday,  the  bill  could  not  go  to  the  House  of  Representatives  until  the  next  week. 
That  as  a  measure  of  restriction,  the  embargo,  if  adopted,  ought  to  be  made  to 
operate  as  equally  as  possible  throughout  the  Union;  but  that  if  many  days  were 
spent  in  the  discussion,  individuals  in  the  neighboring  ports  of  Baltimore,  Phila- 
delphia and  New  York,  would  obtain  information  of  its  object,  which,  not  being 


i824]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  229 

In  the  same  letter  Mr.  Pickering  explicitly  admitted  that  I  had 
never  given  him  the  slightest  cause  of  offence,  and  that  in  five  years 
of  service  together  as  senators  from  the  same  State,  "though  often 
opposed  in  opinion,  on  national  measures,  there  had  never  existed 
for  a  moment  any  personal  difference  between  us."  I  notice  now 
this  admission,  merely  to  mark  the  period  and  the  manner  in  which 
this  mutual  respect  and  forbearance  between  us  ceased,  and  to 
whom  it  was  justly  imputable. 

On  my  part  it  did  not  cease  even  then.  It  was  impossible  to 
have  framed  a  charge  more  destitute  of  foundation;  more  easily 
refuted;  or  more  open  to  the  chastisement  of  severe  retaliation. 
Yet  I  took  no  public  notice  of  it;  nor  shall  I  now  go  further  beyond 
the  simple  declaration  that  I  never  expressed  or  felt  the  sentiment 
imputed  to  me  by  Mr.  Pickering,  than  to  observe,  that  if  I  uttered 
it,  and  had  been  understood  in  the  sense  which  he  has  given  to  my 
words,  it  was  his  duty,  and  the  duty  of  every  senator  present,  who 
so  understood  me,  not  only  to  have  had  my  words  taken  down  at 
the  time,  but  instantly  to  have  called  me  to  order  for  using  them. 

The  words  as  Mr.  Pickering  professes  to  have  understood  them, 
were  undoubtedly  in  the  highest  degree  disorderly  —  and  a  decisive 
proof  that  they  were  not  generally  so  understood  is  found  in  the 
circumstance  that  no  exception  was  taken  to  them  at  the  time. 

generally  public,  would  give  them  undue  advantages  over  their  fellow  citizens, 
especially  those  of  the  remoter  ports. 

"For  these  sentiments,  and  for  his  votes  in  favor  of  the  embargo,  he  is  willing  to 
abide  by  the  judgment  of  his  country,  of  the  world,  and  of  posterity.  The  expres- 
sion of  subserviency  to  the  recommendation  of  the  President,  and  the  refusal  to 
deliberate,  which  have  been  imputed  to  him,  he  explicitly  denies." 

Rev.  David  Osgood  delivered  the  annual  election  sermon  in  1810.  Many  reflec- 
tions made  in  it  seem  to  refer  to  Adams'  political  course,  and  this  directly  applied 
to  him:  "'I  would  not  deliberate,'  exclaims  the  infatuated  senator:  and  so,  laws  are 
at  once  enacted  whose  execution  brings  distress  upon  thousands,  arrests  a  com- 
merce said  to  be  the  second  in  the  world,  and  turns  the  naval  and  military  force  of 
the  country  against  the  industry  and  peace  of  its  inhabitants;  laws,  which,  in  a 
free  republic,  outrage  all  the  principles  of  freedom,  trample  upon  the  most  essential 
rights  of  man,  and  dissolve  the  bonds  of  the  social  compact."  The  sermon  was 
printed  by  the  Commonwealth. 


230  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1824 

It  is  a  rule  of  the  Senate  and  of  all  equitable  deliberative  assem- 
blies, that  exceptionable  words  shall  not  only  be  taken  down  at 
the  time  when  spoken,  but  that  he  who  speaks  them  shall  imme- 
diately be  called  to  account  for,  to  retract,  or  to  explain  them.  Had 
this  rule  been  observed  by  Mr.  Pickering,  when  called  upon  to 
explain  what  I  meant  by  reference  to  the  recommendation  of  the 
executive,  upon  his  responsibility,  and  to  the  other  reasons,  which  he 
might  have,  and  which  I  had  no  doubt  were  satisfactory,  I  should 
have  had  the  opportunity  of  giving  the  explanation  herein  con- 
tained, and  of  showing  that  my  words  imported  no  sentiment  even 
of  improper  deference  for  the  opinions  or  wishes  of  the  executive. 
But  it  is  also  a  breach  of  order,  to  refer  by  way  of  censure,  at  one 
time,  to  words  spoken  at  another;  and  a  rule  equally  just  that  no 
member  shall  be  called  to  account  in  any  other  place,  for  words 
spoken  in  the  Senate.  These  rules  are  founded  upon  principles 
which  every  man  of  a  fair  and  honorable  mind  feels  himself  bound 
to  observe;  and  they  apply  with  peculiar  force  to  a  debate  with 
closed  doors,  which  is  in  its  nature  secret  and  confidential. 

The  error  of  Mr.  Pickering's  charge  consists  in  his  connecting 
my  expression  of  confidence  in  the  recommendation  of  the  ex- 
ecutive, which  I  assigned  as  one  of  my  reasons  for  agreeing  to  the 
act,  with  my  argument  for  the  necessity  of  despatch,  which  was 
founded  in  the  nature  of  the  act  itself,  and  the  portentous  crisis 
of  the  times. 

The  reference  to  the  recommendation  of  the  executive  was  made 
in  answer  to  the  objection  that  the  documents  sent  with  the  mes- 
sage did  not  justify  the  measure  recommended  in  it.  Knowing  that 
there  were  other  reasons,  and  referring  to  them  for  the  justification 
of  my  own  vote,  both  in  committee  and  in  the  Senate,  in  favor  of 
the  bill,  nothing  could  have  been  farther  from  my  thoughts,  as 
nothing  would  have  been  more  in  conflict  with  the  whole  tenor  of 
my  conduct  through  five  years  of  active  service  as  a  member  of 
the  Senate,  than  the  utterance  of  a  sentiment  of  subserviency  to 
the  will9  or  even  to  the  wishes  of  the  executive. 

The  confidence  in  the  executive  which  I  avowed,  was  applicable 


1824]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  231 

to  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  time,  and  to  the  particular 
subject  in  discussion.  Nor  was  that  confidence  misplaced.  In  the 
House  of  Representatives  the  embargo  message  was  debated  three 
days  on  the  merits  —  but  after  the  three  days  the  House  came  to 
the  same  conclusion  at  which  the  Senate  had  arrived  in  four  hours. 
It  was  a  wise,  a  provident,  and,  above  all,  a  purely  patriotic  meas- 
ure. The  share  that  I  had  in  it,  and  the  part  that  I  took  in  pro- 
moting it,  remains  among  the  transactions  of  my  public  life  to 
which  my  memory  recurs  with  the  most  gratifying  recollections. 
Many  other  events  have  been  less  trying  to  the  fortitude  of  ad- 
versity, and  more  favored  by  the  vicissitudes  of  fortune;  but  on 
no  occasion  has  the  consciousness  of  upright  intentions,  and  a  spirit 
independent  alike  of  obsequiousness  to  executive  will,  and  of  fac- 
tious opposition  borne  me  with  more  firm  and  even  step  through 
the  temporary  furnace  of  affliction,  and  sustained  me  under  the 
abandonment  of  friends,  the  alienation  of  popular  favor  at  home, 
and  all  the  obloquy  that  Mr.  Pickering  and  his  co-adjutors  have 
from  that  day  to  this  been  able  to  conjure  upon  my  head. 

Between  the  system  of  policy,  of  which  the  embargo  was  a  prom- 
inent measure,  and  that  of  which  Mr.  Pickering  and  his  friend  the 
president  of  the  Hartford  convention  were  the  "pillars  of  state,'' 
the  final  and  irrevocable  sentence  of  time  has  now  passed  —  I  shall 
not  dwell  upon  it. 

If  there  be  a  lesson  of  political  wisdom,  which  the  people  of  this 
Union  have  had  cause  to  learn  from  their  own  experience,  as  well 
as  from  the  uniform  tenor  of  human  history,  it  is  that  of  carrying 
a  temper  of  mutual  forbearance,  through  all  their  divisions;  of  mak- 
ing the  party  feeling,  which  never  can  include  more  than  a  portion 
of  the  republic,  subordinate  to  the  civic  spirit  which  embraces  the 
whole.  In  the  collisions  of  political  systems,  it  is  the  duty  of  the 
citizen  to  take  his  stand  upon  deliberate  conviction,  and  to  pursue 
his  principles,  regardless  of  consequences  to  himself.  But  when  the 
conflict  is  past,  and  the  contest  of  principle  is  at  an  end,  both  par- 
ties, and  above  all  the  prevailing  party,  should  remember  and 
practice  upon  the  maxim  of  the  Roman  republic,  that  in  civil  dis- 


232 


THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 


sensions,  success  was  but  a  lesser  evil  than  defeat,  and  that  no 
honors  of  triumph  could  ever  be  awarded  to  victory.1 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

WASHINGTON,  20  April,  1808. 
•  •••••• 

As  for  myself,  I  have  not  indeed  written  you  so  often  as 
my  inclination  would  have  dictated;  but  I  hope  you  will  im- 
pute it  to  any  cause  rather  than  to  a  failure  in  the  dearest  of 
my  duties.  Among  the  severest  of  the  trials  which  have  be- 
fallen me  during  the  present  session  of  Congress  (and  they 
have  been  severe  beyond  any  that  I  ever  was  before  called  to 
meet)  that  of  having  incurred  in  some  particulars  the  disap- 
probation of  both  my  parents  has  been  to  me  the  most 
afflictive.  Totally  disconnected  with  all  the  intrigues  of  the 
various  parties  which  have  been  in  such  a  violent  electioneer- 
ing fermentation,  I  have  been  obliged  to  act  upon  principles 
exclusively  my  own,  and  without  having  any  aid  from  the 
party  in  power  have  made  myself  the  very  mark  of  the  most 
envenomed  shafts  from  their  opponents.  Although  I  at- 
tended at  Mr.  Bradley's  caucus  or  convention,  yet  it  has 
been  very  explicitly  understood  by  the  principal  friends  of 
the  candidates  that  I  had  no  intention  to  become  the  partisan 
of  either.2  This  neutrality  with  regard  to  persons  has,  of 

1  Pickering  made  some  "Brief  Remarks"  upon  this  Appendix  in  Poulson's  Amer- 
ican Daily  Advertiser,  August  30,  1824. 

2  Adams,  Memoirs,  January  23,  1808.    The  circular  letter,  dated  the  iQth  and 
printed,  calling  the  meeting,  is  in  the  Adams  Mss.,  and  is  endorsed  "personally 
delivered."    "Bradley,  to  be  sure,  made  too  much  pomposity  of  it  [the  caucus], 
and  thereby  exposed  it  to  criticism.    I  blame  not  your  attendance  nor  your  vote. 
You  ought  to  go  on  with  your  system."    John  Adams  to  John  Quincy  Adams^ 
February  19,  1808.     Ms.     "John  Quincy  Adams!     His  apostasy  is  no  longer  a 
matter  of  doubt  with  anybody.    Would  you  suppose  it  possible  the  scoundrel  could 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  233 

course,  neutralized  the  men  of  both  sides  in  return,  and  hav- 
ing taken  an  active  and  decided  part  upon  much  of  the  public 
business,  it  has  on  one  side  been  convenient  to  load  me  with 
the  burthen  of  managing  as  much  of  it  as  I  would  assume, 
and  on  the  other  to  leave  me  to  defend  myself  as  well  as  I 
could  from  the  assailants  of  another  quarter.  Hence  there 
has  been  scarcely  a  measure  of  great  public  importance  but 
I  have  been  obliged  to  attend  to  in  committee  as  well  as  in 
the  Senate;  and  in  addition  to  all  the  rest  a  question  of  ex- 
pulsion of  a  member  has  been  imposed  upon  me,  of  great 
difficulty  respecting  the  forms  of  proceeding,  and  the  merits 
of  the  particular  case,  which  I  have  been  compelled  to  carry 

summon  impudence  enough  to  go  to  their  caucus?  I  thought  we  had  been  sifted 
so  much  that  what  remained  was  never  to  be  changed.  I  wish  to  God  the  noble 
house  of  Braintree  had  been  put  in  'a  hole,'  and  a  deep  one  too,  twenty  years  ago." 
B.  Gardenier  to  Rufus  King,  January  26,  1808.  Life  and  Correspondence  of  Rufus 
King,  V.  68. 

"Our  letters  say  that  Mr.  Adams,  the  Massachusetts  Senator,  did  attend  the 
Madisonian  caucus,  summoned  by  Bradley;  but  he  did  not  vote;  nor  did  he  take  any 
active  part  in  the  approaching  canvass.  The  late  movements  of  this  gentleman  have 
excited  much  conversation  and  contemplation  among  his  political  friends;  but  those 
who  know  him  best,  do  not  hesitate  to  say,  he  is  still  radically  right;  and  that 
though  the  high  ground  he  has  taken,  like  all  things  in  extremes,  may  have  its 
fault;  it  has  nevertheless  been  warranted  by  a  just  spirit  of  patriotism;  and  a  keen 
susceptibility  of  injuries  received  by  our  country;  and  that  the  ground  he  maintains 
is  more  truly  American,  than  that  of  many  of  those  from  whom  he  has  recently 
differed  in  opinion;  which  events,  he  affirms,  will  confirm  as  correct;  and  which 
Great  Britain  will  yet  acknowledge  to  be  just  and  proper.  On  some  topics  he  dis- 
agrees from  other  leading  federalists;  particularly  in  regard  to  confidence  in  the 
administration;  and  the  embargo.  On  other  subjects  he  does  not  materially  vary 
from  his  late  friends.  He  is  pointed  in  his  condemnation  of  the  whole  affair  of  the 
Chesapeake;  is  the  advocate  of  a  bold  and  manly  vindication  of  our  national  com- 
mercial rights;  and  in  the  stipulations  with  Great  Britain  is  anxious  that  we  may 
make  the  best  bargain  we  can.  If  this  part  of  his  policy  is  not  more  hard  than 
honest;  and  if  we  do  not,  by  adopting  it,  hazard  much  more  than  we  have  any  pros- 
pect of  obtaining  by  plunging  into  an  unnecessary  and,  in  almost  any  possible 
event,  a  disastrous  war,  we  still  think  his  principles  to  be  federal."  Columbian 
Centinel,  February  20,  1808. 


234  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

through  almost  alone.  The  question  was  taken  about  ten 
days  since,  and  the  vote  for  expulsion  was  nineteen  to  ten. 
The  Constitution  requiring  two-thirds  to  carry  the  vote,  it 
failed  by  a  single  vote.  I  could  tell  you,  though  it  may  not 
be  proper  to  say  upon  paper,  by  what  a  curious  concurrence 
of  parties  the  ten  votes  of  acquittal  was  compounded. 

The  letter  of  Mr.  Pickering  is  another  document  of  which 
I  could  account  for  the  origin  from  circumstances  perhaps 
not  known  to  you.  I  was  not  named  in  the  letter,  but  it  was 
hardly  possible  for  me  to  avoid  noticing  it.  My  letter  to  Mr. 
Otis  was  written  in  great  haste,  and  of  course  in  point  of 
composition  is  incorrect.  It  touches  only  upon  the  leading 
inaccuracies  of  his  statement,  because  both  my  own  want  of 
time,  and  a  regard  to  the  public  patience,  made  it  necessary 
to  be  as  short  as  possible.  Yet  it  engrossed  every  leisure 
moment  I  could  command  for  a  fortnight.  I  mention  these 
things  by  way  of  excuse  for  not  having  written  more  fre- 
quently to  you. 

I  have  had  no  intention  or  desire  of  influencing  elections 
by  what  I  have  written.  If  an  impartial  person  will  consider 
the  situation  in  which  I  was  placed  by  Mr.  Pickering's  letter, 
I  think  he  will  perceive  that  something  from  me  was  indis- 
pensable. The  effects  of  my  letter  will,  I  hope,  be  what  was 
intended  —  to  promote  Union  at  home,  and  urge  to  vigor 
against  foreign  hostile  powers.  If  federalism  consists  in 
looking  to  the  British  navy  as  the  only  palladium  of  our 
liberties,  I  must  be  a  political  heretic.  If  federalism  will 
please  to  consist  of  a  determination  to  defend  our  country,  I 
still  subscribe  to  its  doctrines. 

My  father  and  brother  write  me  that  my  letter  to  Mr.  Otis 
will  not  have  much  circulation.  I  know  very  well  that  argu- 
ment for  embargo  will  not  be  so  catching  as  invective  against 
it,  and  if  my  countrymen  are  not  inclined  to  hear  me,  I  must 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  235 

bear  their  indifference  with  as  much  fortitude  and  philos- 
ophy as  I  can  command.  I  should  hope  at  least  that  in 
future,  the  legislature  will  not  be  taken  by  surprise,  and 
driven  to  imprudent  measures,  by  having  a  fire-brand  thrown 
into  their  windows,  in  the  midst  of  their  session. 

We  adjourn  next  Monday.  In  a  fortnight  from  that  time 
I  hope  to  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you,  and  at  least  at 
Quincy  I  shall  be  sure  of  meeting  no  altered  faces.  .  .  . 

Your's  dutifully. 


TO  GEORGE  BOYD 

BOSTON,  14  May,  1808. 

MY  DEAR  SIR: 

I  received  the  day  before  yesterday  your  favor  of  the  5th 
instant,  which  I  should  have  answered  immediately,  but 
for  a  species  of  indisposition,  which  has  disqualified  me  for 
occupation  of  any  kind. 

I  can  see  no  impropriety  in  your  intended  application  to 
Mr.  Madison  for  the  appointment  as  a  messenger  to  bear 
dispatches  to  France,  and  I  could  indulge  my  feelings  with 
no  higher  gratification  than  that  of  aiding  your  wishes  by 
my  recommendation.  But  my  situation  in  relation  to  the 
Secretary  of  State,  as  well  as  to  every  other  member  of  the 
administration,  is  such  as  to  forbid  me  from  every  the  most 
distant  appearance  of  solicitation  of  any  favor  of  any  de- 
scription whatsoever,  for  myself  or  for  any  of  my  relatives. 
The  course  of  my  political  conduct  has  recently  been  such 
as  to  impose  upon  me  a  prohibition  of  this  kind,  more  rigor- 
ous still  than  I  should  have  felt,  had  my  views  of  public 
affairs  been  at  the  widest  variance  from  those  of  the  admin- 
istration. If  you  should  incline  to  the  opinion  that  this 


236  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

resolution  bears  the  complexion  of  a  delicacy  too  scrupulous, 
savoring  more  of  indifference  to  the  service  of  my  friends 
than  of  genuine  purity  of  principle,  cast  your  eye  over  the 
animadversions  in  all  the  federal  prints,  and  observe  the 
baseness  of  motive  which  they  are  all  so  ready  to  find  for 
every  act  of  my  life,  since  my  opinions  on  objects  of  national 
importance  have  differed  from  those  which  they  have  thought 
proper  to  embrace.  This  sort  of  invective  I  can  bear  with 
proper  composure  so  long  as  I  know  it  to  be  utterly  false. 
But  if  it  were  possible  for  my  own  mind  to  charge  me  with 
the  same  accusations,  if  by  the  request  or  even  by  the  receipt 
of  a  single  favor,  however  slight,  from  the  administration, 
I  could  give  occasion  even  for  a  just  suspicion  of  the  principles 
upon  which  I  have  supported  their  measures,  I  should  have 
in  my  own  bosom  a  chastiser  more  severe  and  more  im- 
placable than  the  most  inveterate  of  my  enemies,  whether 
of  the  old  school  or  of  the  new. 

This  determination  has  already  more  than  once  compelled 
me  to  decline  an  interference  in  favor  of  some  of  my  family 
connections  which  was  desired,  and  which  it  was  with  much 
reluctance  that  I  withheld.  On  no  occasion  could  it  possibly 
be  more  at  war  with  my  strongest  inclinations  than  on  that 
which  deprives  me  of  the  means  of  rendering  an  acceptable 
service  to  you.  It  is  I  believe  known  both  to  Mr.  Madison 
and  to  Mr.  Jefferson,  that  I  have  no  personal  favor  whatso- 
ever to  ask  of  either,  and  an  application  in  behalf  of  any 
person  connected  with  me  would  appear  a  departure  from 
those  principles  to  which  in  all  consistency  I  ought  to  adhere.1 

1  Another  had  suggested  to  Jefferson  the  sacrifice  made  by  Adams.  "The  federal 
party  in  this  State  have  obtained  the  government.  Their  principal  object,  at  pres- 
ent, appears  to  be  the  political  and  even  the  personal  destruction  of  John  Quincy 
Adams.  They  have  yesterday  come  to  the  choice  of  a  senator  in  Congress  to  suc- 
ceed him  next  year.  James  Lloyd  had  246  [248]  votes,  Adams,  213.  It  is  of  great 
consequence  to  the  interest  of  Mr.  Adams,  and  to  that  of  your  administration,  to 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  237 

The  state  of  our  politics  under  the  new  legislature  is  not 
yet  absolutely  ascertained,  but  in  all  probability  the  major- 
ity in  both  branches  will  be  federal.  This  I  suppose  to  be 
principally  the  effect  of  the  embargo,  an  effect  which  will  not 
be  confined  to  this  part  of  the  country. 


TO  THE  HONORABLE  SENATE  AND  HOUSE  OF 
REPRESENTATIVES  OF  THE  COMMONWEALTH 
OF  MASSACHUSETTS 

BOSTON,  8  June,  1808. 
GENTLEMEN: 

It  has  been  my  endeavor,  as  I  have  conceived  it  was  my 
duty  while  holding  a  seat  in  the  Senate  of  the  Union,  to 
support  the  Administration  of  the  general  government  in  all 
necessary  measures  within  its  competency,  the  object  of 
which  was  to  preserve  from  seizure  and  depredation  the 
persons  and  property  of  our  citizens,  and  to  vindicate  the 
rights  essential  to  the  independence  of  our  country,  against 
the  unjust  pretensions  and  aggressions  of  all  foreign  powers. 

Certain  resolutions  recently  passed  by  you  have  expressed 
your  disapprobation  of  measures  to  which  under  the  influence 
of  these  motives  I  gave  my  assent.  As  far  as  the  opinions  of 
a  majority  in  the  legislature  can  operate,  I  cannot  but  con- 
sider these  resolutions  as  enjoining  upon  the  representation 
of  the  State  in  Congress  a  sort  of  opposition  to  the  national 
administration,  in  which  I  cannot  consistently  with  my  prin- 
ciples concur. 

To  give  you  however  the  opportunity  of  placing  in  the 
Senate  of  the  United  States  a  member,  who  may  devise  and 

rescue  him  from  their  triumphs.  I  know  not  how  this  can  be  done  otherwise  than 
by  finding  him  a  foreign  appointment  of  respectability."  James  Sullivan  to  Jef- 
ferson, June  3,  1808.  Jefferson  Mso. 


238  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

enforce  the  means  of  relieving  our  fellow  citizens  from  their 
present  sufferings,  without  sacrificing  the  peace  of  the  nation, 
the  personal  liberties  of  our  seamen,  or  the  neutral  rights  of 
our  commerce,  I  now  restore  to  you  the  trust  committed  to 
my  charge,  and  resign  my  seat  as  a  Senator  of  the  United 
States  on  the  part  of  this  Commonwealth.  I  am,  &C.1 

TO  ORCHARD  COOK  2 

BOSTON,  [22]  August,  1808. 
DEAR  SIR: 

Your  favor  of  the  24th  and  3Oth  last  month  came  a  few 
days  since  to  my  hands.  I  am  duly  sensible  of  the  expres- 
sion of  your  sentiments  contained  in  it,  in  relation  personally 
to  me.  Under  the  present  situation  and  circumstances  of  the 
country  I  certainly  should  not  have  thought  myself  justi- 
fiable in  retiring  from  the  public  service,  had  it  been  left  at 
my  option  to  remain  in  it.  But  when  the  election  was  pre- 
cipitated at  the  May  session  of  the  legislature  contrary  to 
all  example,  and  apparently  for  the  sole  purpose  of  manifest- 

1  See  Mass.  Hist.  Soc.  Proceedings,  XLV.  354-374. 

"My  conduct  as  a  public  man,  having  been  invariably  and  exclusively  governed 
by  a  sense  of  public  duty,  I  cannot  but  be  gratified  that  it  has  met  your  approbation. 
Dictated  by  principles  more  durable  in  their  nature  than  the  passions  of  individuals 
or  the  prejudices  of  party,  I  confidently  trust  that  it  will  eventually  be  estimated 
at  its  true  value  by  the  general  sentiment  of  my  country.  To  the  merit  of  good  in- 
tentions, it  is  entitled;  to  that  of  zeal  for  the  preservation  of  our  national  Union  and 
independence,  it  has  a  claim  equally  just.  The  rest  is  in  the  judgment  of  others  and 
I  shall  cheerfully  leave  it  to  the  deliberate  decision  of  the  nation.  Union  and  in- 
dependence are  the  Herculean  pillars  of  my  political  system,  and  if  they  ever  fall, 
I  am  content  to  fall  with  them,  or  to  say 

Sistimus  hue  tandem,  ubi  nobis  defuit  orbis." 
To  Samuel  Cleveland  Blydon,  July  13,  1808.    Ms. 

2  Of  Wiscasset,  Mass.  He  appears  to  have  defended  Adams  in  an  address  on 
Independence  day,  printed  in  the  Eastern  Argus. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  239 

ing  the  disposition  of  the  ruling  majority  with  regard  to  me, 
and  when  the  same  majority  had  passed  resolutions  in  my 
view  unconstitutional,  and  calculated  in  their  effect,  as  far 
as  they  could  operate,  to  sacrifice  the  best  wishes  of  this 
nation  to  the  unjust  claims  and  pretensions  of  a  foreign 
power,  I  could  not  consistently  with  my  principles  continue 
for  a  moment  longer  the  representative  of  a  body  of  men, 
whose  policy  was  so  utterly  abhorrent  to  what  I  conceive 
the  sacred  duties  of  every  independent  American. 

In  resigning  my  seat  for  the  ensuing  session,  I  felt  the  less 
reluctance  at  the  sacrifice,  from  a  full  conviction  upon  my 
mind  that  no  exertion  of  mine  could  materially  aid  the  public 
service,  and  that  the  substitution  of  another  member  of  the 
Senate  in  my  stead  would  not  in  the  slightest  degree  affect  the 
general  policy  of  the  government.  It  is  possible  that  my 
views  of  public  affairs  are  too  conciliatory  for  the  temper  of 
any  party.  But  I  hope  there  will  yet  be  in  Congress  and  in 
the  nation,  an  energy  of  union  sufficient  to  counteract  all 
the  personal  interests,  all  the  electioneering  passions,  and 
all  the  paltry  geographical  jealousies  and  envies,  which  con- 
stitute the  repulsive  parts  of  our  political  system. 

I  am  altogether  incapable  of  giving  you  any  information 
upon  which  reliance  could  be  placed,  respecting  the  prob- 
abilities of  the  issue  in  which  the  approaching  presidential 
election  will  terminate.  I  do  not  however  imagine  that  the 
federalists  will  eventually  take  the  part  of  Mr.  Clinton.  I 
presume  they  will  support  candidates  of  their  own,  though  I 
know  not  who  they  will  be. 

There  has  been  a  meeting  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  town,1 
in  which  a  petition  to  the  President  was  voted,  requesting 
him  to  suspend  the  embargo  in  whole  or  in  part,  and  if  he 
has  any  doubt  of  his  power,  to  call  Congress  together  im- 

1  August  9.    The  petition  is  in  The  Repertory,  August  12,  1808. 


24o  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

mediately.  The  alleged  ground  of  this  proceeding  is  the 
recent  revolution  in  Spain.1  And  the  first  idea  was  to  ask 
for  a  suspension  of  the  embargo,  at  least  so  far  as  related  to 
Spain  and  her  colonies.  The  object  was  accomplished  in  this 
form  at  Newbury  Port,2  where  a  meeting  was  held  on  the 
same  day  with  that  in  this  town.  But  here  some  objections 
were  urged  in  town-meeting  by  the  opponents  to  the  meas- 
ure, which  occasioned  a  different  modification  of  the  petition, 
and  the  request  from  Boston  is  couched  in  more  general 
terms.  It  appeared  to  be  understood  as  of  course  that  the 
removal  of  the  embargo  must  be  succeeded  by  an  immediate 
war,  which  was  loudly  and  distinctly  called  for  by  the  peti- 
tioners in  town-meeting,  but  for  which  it  is  very  apparent 
since  the  meeting,  that  the  generality  of  the  inhabitants  of 
this  town  are  not  yet  prepared. 

If  the  people  have  not,  as  some  of  your  friends  think,  vir- 
tue enough  to  bear  that  embargo,  which  was  so  necessary 
to  preserve  their  dearest  rights  and  their  best  interests,  I 
know  not  where  they  will  find  virtue  to  bear  that  war,  which 
must  take  its  place.  I  have  always  considered  that  the  true 
and  only  alternative  was  this  —  embargo  or  war;  and  I  re- 
main unshaken  in  that  opinion.  Now,  although  embargo  is 
beyond  all  question  a  distressing  calamity  to  this  country, 
yet  in  comparison  with  war,  either  with  Britain  or  France,  I 
still  esteem  it  as  no  more  than  the  bite  of  a  flea  to  the  bite  of 
a  rattlesnake. 

The  accounts  from  Spain  are  indeed  of  high  importance, 
though  coming  as  they  do  through  the  medium  of  British 
representations,  we  must  wait  somewhat  longer  before  we 
can  distinctly  discern  their  character.  I  do  not  think  them 
sufficient  grounds  as  yet  for  removing  the  embargo,  and  es- 

1  The  "Dos  de  Maio"  —  May  2.    See  Henry  Adams,  History,  IV.  300. 

2  Reported  in  the  same  paper  with  the  Boston  petition. 


I808]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  241 

pecially  would  it  be  in  my  opinion  bad  policy  to  remove  it 
partially  in  favor  of  the  Spanish  Juntoists  —  a  partiality 
which  both  France  and  Britain  would  be  justified  in  resent- 
ing, unless  we  have  evidence  that  the  Spanish  revolutionists 
have  repealed  the  decrees  against  our  commerce,  which  their 
old  government  had  adopted. 

It  is  however  natural  to  indulge  hopes  from  any  material 
change  in  the  state  of  national  affairs,  when  the  state  from 
which  the  change  occurs  is  very  bad.  The  commotions  in 
Spain,  I  love  to  hope,  will  at  least  give  so  much  employment 
to  France  as  to  awaken  interests  there  sufficiently  strong  to 
produce  relaxation  in  the  French  decrees  against  our  trade, 
and  that  these  will  be  preceded  or  followed  by  like  relaxations 
on  the  part  of  Britain.  In  both  or  either  of  these  cases  we 
shall  be  immediately  released  from  the  pressures  of  the  em- 
bargo, without  being  driven  into  the  war,  and  the  great  sys- 
tem of  American  neutrality  in  European  wars,  which  Wash- 
ington with  so  much  difficulty  established,  and  which  it  has 
always  been  so  difficult  to  maintain,  will  be  preserved  from 
the  most  violent  assault,  and  the  most  imminent  danger  to 
which  it  has  ever  been  exposed.  Yet  so  precarious  are  the 
effects  which  follow  from  great  events,  that  I  am  expressing 
now  rather  ardent  wishes  than  sanguine  expectations.  There 
is  another  and  more  unpleasant  possibility,  that  Britain  — 
of  all  the  nations  upon  earth  most  prone  to  grow  insolent 
upon  success  —  instead  of  relaxing  will  be  encouraged  to 
persevere,  and  to  enlarge  upon  her  system  of  hostility  to 
neutral  trade.  To  this  she  has  had  and  still  has  too  much 
encouragement  from  this  country,  where  party  spirit  and 
profligate  ambition  have  so  strong  a  predominancy  over  the 
spirit  of  patriotism,  that  in  every  insult  and  outrage  we  have 
suffered  from  England,  some  have  been  ready  to  support 
her,  and  where  men  of  great  passions  and  little  souls  have 


242  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

been  ready  to  sacrifice  the  birth-rights  of  the  country,  be- 
cause with  them  their  political  rivals  and  antagonists  would 
also  be  sacrificed. 

What  the  President  will  do  upon  the  applications  for  re- 
moving the  embargo  at  this  time  I  know  not.  And  if  it 
should  continue  until  Congress  meet,  the  question  will  still 
be  difficult  and  important,  what  shall  be  substituted  in  its 
stead.  If  a  majority  of  the  two  houses  could  be  obtained  of 
your  and  my  mind,  the  substitute  might  be  found.  But  I 
pray  to  Heaven,  and  I  confidently  trust,  that  it  will  contain 
no  ingredient  of  base  submission  to  any  foreign  usurpation, 
no  surrender  of  that  inheritance  which  it  is  our  sacred  duty 
to  transmit  as  we  received  it  unimpaired.  In  God's  name 
let  us  have  no  sanctions  of  our  own  admission  for  British  im- 
pressments or  British  taxation. 

I  am,  &c. 

TO  WILLIAM  BRANCH  GILES 

BOSTON,  15  November,  1808. 

MY  DEAR  SIR: 

Accept  my  best  thanks  for  your  friendly  and  obliging 
favors  of  the  yth  l  and  8th,  with  the  copy  of  the  message. 
The  regret  which  you  are  good  enough  to  express  at  not  meet- 
ing me  in  the  Senate  chamber,  is  at  once  so  kind  and  so 
flattering  that  it  will,  I  hope,  furnish  me  an  excuse  for  ex- 
plaining fully  to  you,  why  you  did  not  meet  me  there. 

I  presume  it  unnecessary  to  mention  to  you  that  my  im- 
mediate constituents,  the  legislature  of  Massachusetts,  had 
already  provided  that  I  should  meet  nobody  there  after 

1  Printed  in  Adams,  New  England  Federalism,  203.    For  Giles'  denial  of  any  cor- 
respondence with  Adams  in  1808-1809,  see  Ib.,  34. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  243 

the  present  session.  Had  mine  been  an  ordinary  case,  this 
circumstance  would  not  have  induced  me  to  resign  the  re- 
mainder of  the  term.  But  in  the  face  of  every  former  ex- 
ample, the  election  of  a  Senator  was  precipitated  at  the  sum- 
mer session  of  the  legislature,  instead  of  waiting  for  the 
usual  time,  which  would  have  been  in  February  next,  and  the 
point  of  unseating  me  was  carried  by  such  means,  as,  I 
suppose,  are  common  enough  among  electioneering  parti- 
sans, but  manifest  a  much  higher  estimate  of  the  prize  at 
stake,  than  I  have  ever  accustomed  myself  to  bestow  upon 
anything  in  the  shape  of  public  office.  It  seemed  as  if  the 
salvation  of  the  country,  or  what  was  substituted  for  the 
country,  was  thought  to  depend  upon  getting  me  out.  But 
this  was  not  all.  The  same  legislature  passed  resolutions  in 
the  nature  of  instructions  to  their  Senators,  which  I  utterly 
disapproved,  and  which  if  I  had  retained  my  place,  I  should 
have  held  it  my  duty  not  only  to  decline  supporting,  but  to 
resist  to  the  utmost  of  my  power.  Placed  thus  in  the  dilemma 
between  the  respect  due  to  the  will,  so  strongly  manifested 
by  my  special  constituents,  and  the  still  more  imperious  duty 
to  my  country,  under  a  sentence  of  official  prescription  by  the 
former,  and  under  the  falsest  and  most  odious  imputations 
upon  my  motives,  my  conduct  during  the  session  that  was 
approaching  would  either  not  have  been  that  of  a  free  agent, 
or  it  would  have  been  at  the  hazard  of  sacrifices,  personal 
and  domestic,  which  upon  full  deliberation  I  did  not  think  the 
occasion  required  me  to  incur.  As  to  holding  my  seat  in  the 
Senate  of  the  United  States  without  exercising  the  most 
perfect  freedom  of  agency,  under  the  sole  and  exclusive  con- 
trol of  my  own  sense  of  right,  that  was  out  of  the  question. 
But  I  was  aware  of  the  obligation  upon  a  citizen,  charged 
with  a  public  trust,  to  remain  at  his  post  unless  duly  relieved, 
and  that  these  were  times  when  the  obligation  pressed  with 


244  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

peculiar  force.  This  consideration  induced  me  long  to  hesi- 
tate before  I  decided  upon  my  resignation,  and  the  idea 
which  finally  turned  the  balance  in  my  mind,  was  the  per- 
fect confidence  I  had  in  the  firmness  and  wisdom  of  the 
Senate,  as  I  knew  it  would  remain  composed  at  the  present 
session.  I  knew  the  vast  majority  of  that  body  would  neither 
betray  nor  surrender  the  essential  rights  of  the  nation.  I 
saw  no  danger  in  that  quarter  which  could  need  any  inter- 
position, which  it  would  be  in  my  power  as  an  individual 
member  to  present,  and  I  could  not  flatter  myself  that  I 
should  be  able  to  render  any  public  service  by  my  particular 
exertion,  which  could  compensate  for  that  self-degradation, 
to  which  I  must  have  submitted  in  continuing  to  serve  prin- 
cipals, who  had  no  confidence  in  their  agent,  and  whose 
measures  were  as  abhorrent  to  his  sentiments,  as  his  conduct 
had  been  to  theirs.  It  was  a  subject  upon  which  I  thought 
myself  obligated  to  take  no  counsel,  but  that  of  my  own  heart 
and  understanding,  and  my  resolution  was  taken  with  great 
reluctance.  For  I  should  have  rejoiced  in  the  opportunity  to 
have  manifested  to  the  last  moment  of  my  official  life,  my 
adherence  to  the  principles  upon  which  I  had  uniformly 
acted,  and  my  zealous  cooperation  in  the  measures,  adopted 
by  Congress  in  harmony  with  the  executive,  to  resist  the 
outrages  of  both  the  great  warring  powers  of  Europe. 

With  regard  to  the  public  reproaches  in  pamphlets  and 
newspapers,  with  which  I  have  been  favored,  and  which, 
knowing  as  you  do  their  falsehood,  your  friendly  concern 
has  led  you  to  see  with  regret,  I  shall  confess  to  you  that 
instead  of  seeing  them,  as  perhaps  a  public  man  ought  to  do, 
with  cool  indifference,  I  have  perhaps  observed  them  with 
too  much  satisfaction.  I  have  felt  on  this  occasion  a  little 
of  the  spirit  of  martyrdom;  knowing  that  my  governing 
motives  have  been  pure,  disinterested  and  patriotic,  I  con- 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  245 

sidered  every  calumny  cast  upon  me,  as  the  tribute  of  prof- 
ligate passions  to  honest  principle.  As  the  temper  of  a 
weapon  can  be  ascertained  only  by  a  trial,  I  have  been 
pleased  to  undergo  that  test,  which  no  man  of  truly  honor- 
able purpose  can  escape.  I  have  enjoyed  all  along  that  sort 
of  support,  which  is  beyond  the  reach  of  human  slander,  the 
support  of  my  own  conscious  integrity.  And  I  had  the  ad- 
ditional satisfaction  of  reflecting,  that  there  existed  even  in 
the  knowledge  of  others,  particularly  in  yours,  evidence  that 
my  public  conduct  had  not  been  stimulated  by  any  personal 
or  selfish  views.  I  had  no  doubt,  that  if  any  occasion  should 
require  it,  you  would  not  withhold  that  testimony,  which 
might  be  exclusively  in  your  possession,  but  I  have  never 
seen  any  reason  for  believing  that  it  would  ever  be  necessary 
for  my  justification. 

In  relation  to  future  time,  whether  my  fellow-citizens  in 
this  Commonwealth  will  ever  again  think  such  services  as 
I  can  render  them  worth  calling  for,  is  for  their  consideration 
not  for  mine.  Our  usages  do  not  authorize  even  those  who 
are  candidates  for  popular  election  to  offer  themselves,  and 
if  they  did,  there  is  no  station  in  their  gift  for  which  I  should 
feel  the  slightest  inclination  to  solicit  their  suffrages.  What- 
ever of  profit  or  of  honor  there  may  be  in  the  piping  times  of 
peace  in  the  public  service,  I  know  that,  in  the  present  situa- 
tion and  prospects  of  this  country,  public  office  of  any  kind 
would  to  me  be  an  oppressive  burden,  a  post  of  little  else 
than  toil  and  danger,  a  thankless  task  from  which  I  could 
anticipate  nothing  better,  and  might  rationally  apprehend  a 
catastrophe  infinitely  worse  than  that  which  has  befallen 
me.  If  then  recovering  from  that  delusion  to  which  you 
refer,  they  should  hereafter  entertain  a  more  favorable  opin- 
ion of  my  intentions  and  of  my  capacity  to  serve  them  faith- 
fully, the  manifestation  of  their  wishes  will  always  be  in  their 


246  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

power,  and  neither  difficulty  nor  danger  shall  deter  me  from 
any  service,  which  they  can  demand  and  which  I  can  render. 

Let  me  again  apologize  to  you  for  saying  so  much  of  myself. 
As  the  circumstances  of  the  last  session  led  me  in  the  confi- 
dence which  your  character  and  situation  had  inspired,  to 
unfold  to  you  in  the  most  explicit  manner  my  personal  views, 
or  rather  the  absence  of  all  personal  views,  in  connection 
with  my  public  conduct,  I  could  not  now  resist  the  oppor- 
tunity of  opening  to  you  with  equal  frankness  the  motives, 
upon  which  I  have  acted  to  the  close  of  my  career.  And  I 
will  only  add,  that  far  from  regretting  any  one  of  those  acts 
for  which  I  have  suffered,  I  would  do  them  over  again,  were 
they  now  to  be  done  at  the  hazard  of  ten  times  as  much 
slander,  unpopularity,  and  (if  that  were  possible)  displace- 
ment. 

In  the  removal  to  a  private  station,  however,  under  a  gov- 
ernment like  ours,  a  man,  though  relieved  from  the  burden 
of  responsibility,  cannot  cease  to  feel  a  concern  for  the  af- 
fairs of  the  public.  And  while  the  independence  and  union 
of  the  nation  are  at  stake  upon  the  perseverance  and  energy 
of  those  who  administer  its  affairs  and  of  the  people,  no 
man  with  an  American  heart  can  stand  by  and  behold  the 
struggle  with  indifference.  That  we  have  gone  thus  far 
without  being  involved  as  parties  in  the  war,  and  without 
the  abandonment  of  one  national  right,  is  to  me  a  subject  of 
much  consolation;  but  difficulties,  obstacles  and  dangers 
seem  to  multiply  as  we  advance,  the  pressure  of  foreign  in- 
justice continues  with  increasing  aggravation,  and  combining 
with  internal  party  spirit  encroaches  upon  the  resolution  of 
the  people,  so  as  sometimes  to  make  me  doubtful  whether 
they  will  continually  prove  true  to  themselves,  through  the 
long  and  severe  trial  they  have  to  go  through.  The  result  of 
the  recent  elections  has,  indeed,  upon  the  whole  been  highly 


i8os]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  247 

to  their  credit,  and  promises  a  steadiness  equal  to  my  best 
expectations.  The  recent  events  in  Europe,  though  I  hope 
their  ultimate  consequences  will  be  salutary,  have  in  their 
immediate  effects  been  unpropitious  to  us,  by  encouraging 
the  insolence  and  injustice  of  Great  Britain,  without  cor- 
recting that  of  France,  and  unfortunately  we  have  too  many 
among  us  who,  to  say  the  least,  are  ready  to  let  the  rights  of 
the  country  go,  provided  they  can  see  their  political  op- 
ponents overwhelmed  in  the  same  ruin. 

The  President's  message  has  presented  a  state  of  things 
not  unexpected  though  gloomy.1  We  have  seen  of  the  docu- 
ments only  a  short  letter  from  General  Armstrong,  and  the 
two  latest  papers  between  Mr.  Pinkney  and  Mr.  Canning. 
You  will  not  flatter  yourself  that  these  documents  will 
silence  the  tales  of  French  influence  and  partiality  to  Napo- 
leon. The  more  absurd  this  story  grows,  the  more  rooted  it 
will  become  in  the  soil  of  faction,  and  by  the  time  it  shall 
have  been  proved  impossible,  it  will  become  an  article  of 
faith,  to  doubt  of  which  would  lead  to  the  stake,  if  there 
were  power  to  plant  one. 

I  observe  that  your  motion  2  in  the  Senate  contemplates 
a  further  continuance  of  the  embargo  laws,  while  that  of 
Mr.  Eppes  3  in  the  House  appears  to  prefer  a  substitute, 
which  would  partially  open  our  trade.  Between  a  choice 
of  great  evils,  I  trust  that  candor  and  patriotic  deliberation 
will  finally  discern  which  is  the  least.  I  can  scarcely  venture 
to  entertain  an  opinion,  though  if  the  non-intercourse  could 
be  carried  into  effect,  I  should  incline  to  think  it  better 

1  Annual  Message,   November  8.     A  confidential  message  on  relations  with 
France  was  sent  to  Congress  the  same  day.    The  former  is  in  Messages  and  Papers 
of  the  President,  I.  451;  the  latter  in  American  State  Papers,  Foreign  Relations,  III. 
242. 

2  Annals  of  Congress,  loth  Cong.,  2d  Sess.,  16. 

3  /*.,  4?8. 


248  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

than  that  internal  stagnation,  which  may  send  too  much 
blood  to  the  head.  As  change,  it  would  in  some  sort  discon- 
cert opposition,  by  necessitating  a  change  also  in  their  bat- 
teries. But  whether  it  would  not  increase  the  danger  of  war 
(the  trap  in  which  they  still  hope  to  catch  the  present  ad- 
ministration) is  [for]  your  better  and  wiser  consideration. 
At  all  events  I  conclude  with  the  sentiment  which  I  know  will 
meet  with  the  most  cordial  sympathy  in  your  mind,  ANY- 
THING BUT  SUBMISSION.  I  am,  &c. 

TO  EZEKIEL  BACON  * 

BOSTON,  November  lyth,  1808. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

Your  obliging  letter  of  the  8th  instant,  with  a  copy  of  the 
President's  message  at  the  commencement  of  the  session, 
has  come  to  hand.  I  see  with  much  concern,  though  without 
surprise,  that  the  prospect  of  obtaining  anything  like  justice 
from  the  great  belligerent  powers  of  Europe,  is  no  better 
than  it  was  at  the  close  of  the  last  session.  The  alternatives 
mentioned  in  your  letter  embrace  all  the  varieties  of  policy, 
between  which  a  choice  can  be  made.  Among  these  that  of 
declaring  war  I  presume  will  have  the  fewest  advocatesc 
The  wrongs  we  are  suffering  from  both  the  scourges  of  man- 
kind are  so  similar,  that  we  would  scarcely  assume  a  founda- 
tion for  the  declaration  against  one,  which  would  not  equally 
require  it  against  the  other,  and  a  declaration  against  either 
would  place  the  country  in  a  more  dangerous  situation,  and 
the  administration  in  a  deeper  perplexity  to  get  along,  than 
can  arise  from  the  present  state  of  things.  A  war  with  Eng- 
land would  probably  soon  if  not  immediately  be  complicated 

1  On  the  part  played  by  Ezekiel  Bacon  in  the  repeal  of  the  embargo,  see  Henry 
Adams,  History,  IV.  432-463. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  249 

with  a  civil  war,  and  with  a  desperate  effort  to  break  up  the 
Union,  the  project  for  which  has  been  several  years  prepar- 
ing in  this  quarter,  and  which  waits  only  for  a  possible 
chance  of  popular  support  to  explode.  A  war  with  France 
would  be  extremely  unpopular  in  every  part  of  the  Union, 
for  it  would  be  odious  to  all  the  friends  of  the  administration, 
as  directly  contrary  to  the  permanent  interests  and  policy 
of  the  Union;  and  although  it  would  exactly  meet  the  wishes 
of  the  tories,  yet  it  would  not  be  with  the  view  to  support  the 
administration  in  carrying  on  the  war,  but  as  a  ground  for 
pursuing  further  measures  of  attack  against  the  adminis- 
tration itself.  Nor  is  there  any  prospect  that  we  should  at 
the  issue  of  a  war  with  either  power  obtain  any  security  for 
any  rights,  which  we  may  not  at  least  as  reasonably  expect 
by  further  perseverance  in  the  pacific  policy.  War,  there- 
fore, I  presume  we  shall  not  immediately  have.  Under  the 
present  state  of  affairs,  to  open  our  commerce  with  permis- 
sion to  arm  in  defence  of  the  exercise  of  neutral  trade,  would 
be  war  in  the  result,  though  it  would  be  upon  a  principle  more 
exclusively  defensive,  than  would  be  implied  in  a  declaration. 
Arming,  both  public  and  private,  was  the  system  which  in 
my  particular  opinion  ought  to  have  been  adopted  last  win- 
ter, immediately  after  the  embargo  was  first  laid;  but  at 
that  time  I  found  very  few  of  any  party  who  thought  with 
me,  and  now  the  season  for  it  is  past,  even  if  it  was  then  ex- 
pedient. 

The  circumstances,  too,  of  the  present  time  render  it  much 
more  questionable  to  my  mind  than  it  was  then.  The  British 
Orders  of  Council  were  then  not  sanctioned  by  Parliament. 
The  Milan  decree,  and  I  know  not  how  many  others  equally 
savage,  had  not  issued.  The  very  determination  of  resistance 
then  manifested  might  have  deterred  from  these  extremities 
of  outrage. 


250  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

The  British  government  had  not  been  stimulated  to  per- 
severance, either  by  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese  diversion 
in  their  favor,  or  by  the  open  and  shameless  support  which 
they  have  found  from  faction  in  this  country. 

Arming  now  would  be  less  efficacious  as  a  measure  for  pre- 
serving peace,  would  lead  more  inevitably  to  war,  and  would 
have  less  support  from  the  approbation  of  the  people.  The 
real  choice,  then,  seems  to  be,  between  a  continuance  of  the 
embargo,  and  its  removal,  with  a  substitution  of  total  non- 
intercourse  with  France  and  England  in  its  stead.  For  as  to 
submission,  I  will  not  disgrace  the  Congress  of  this  Union 
so  much  as  to  suppose,  that  this  project  will  receive  any  coun- 
tenance from  either  branch  of  the  legislative  authority. 

Between  the  embargo  and  the  non-intercourse  system, 
under  my  present  state  of  information  I  should  strongly  in- 
cline to  the  last.  It  would,  indeed,  incur  a  new  hazard  of 
eventual  war  abroad,  but  I  think  it  would  remove  the  risk  of 
war  at  home  for  the  present.  I  believe  the  embargo  cannot 
possibly  be  continued  much  longer,  without  meeting  direct 
and  forcible  resistance  in  this  part  of  the  country.  The 
people  have  been  so  long  stimulated  to  this  forcible  re- 
sistance, and  they  have  been  so  unequivocally  led  to  expect 
support  from  the  State  authorities  in  such  resistance,  that 
I  do  not  think  the  temptation  will  be  much  longer  withstood. 
If  the  law  should  be  openly  set  at  defiance,  and  broken  by 
direct  violence  under  support  from  the  State  authorities, 
it  is  to  be  considered  how  the  general  government  will  be  able 
to  carry  it  through.  No  doubt  by  military  execution.  But 
that  will  make  civil  war,  the  very  point  at  which  the  tories 
are  driving,  and  in  the  event  of  which  it  may  at  least  be  con- 
jectured that  they  have  already  secured  British  support 
and  assistance.  For  it  is  precisely  in  this  form,  an  organized 
insurrection  against  the  national  government  by  State  au- 


i8os]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  251 

thority,  that  the  project  of  disunion  can  alone  be  accom- 
plished, and  that  this  project  has  been  in  serious  contempla- 
tion of  those,  whom  you  describe  as  being  called  in  England 
Colonel  P[ickering]'s  party,  for  several  years,  I  know  by  the 
most  unequivocal  evidence,  though  it  be  not  provable  in  a 
court  of  law.  To  this  project  as  matured,  a  very  small  party 
of  the  federal  party  is  privy.  The  great  proportion  of  them 
do  not  even  believe  its  existence.  They  are  not  prepared  for 
supporting  this  system,  and  the  object  of  the  leaders  is,  to 
take  advantage  of  every  circumstance  which  can  enable  them 
to  work  upon  the  popular  mind  to  support  the  scheme  of 
division  by  the  necessary  force.  Now  the  embargo  is,  un- 
fortunately, one  of  those  measures,  upon  which  the  two  pub- 
lic authorities  may  be  brought  in  collision  with  each  other, 
and  that  the  party  has  been  laboring  with  unwearied  indus- 
try to  produce  that  effect,  the  proceedings  of  our  legislature, 
the  instigations  to  resistance  against  the  embargo  laws  on  the 
pretence  of  their  unconstitutionality,  the  countenance  given 
to  this  paltry  pretence  by  a  STATE  JUDGE  [Parsons],  and  the 
connection  between  his  extra-judicial  opinions  and  the  at- 
tempts at  forcible  resistance,  which  have  already  been  made, 
and  with  the  experiment  upon  the  District  Court  at  Salem, 
afford  the  evidence,  which  the  most  purblind  observer  cannot 
but  observe.1  A  non-intercourse,  it  seems  to  me,  would  not 
be  so  liable  to  this  species  of  opposition  as  an  embargo.  An- 
other reason  for  preferring  it  is,  that  in  the  spirit  of  party,  the 
faction  is  afraid  of  it.  For  among  themselves,  I  know  that 
they  chuckle  and  exult  as  much  at  the  operation  of  the  em- 
bargo, as  in  public  they  whine  and  rave  against  it.  They  now 
feel  perfectly  confident  that  the  embargo  will  not  answer  its 
purpose  as  a  compulsory  measure,  and  they  hope  to  see  the 
government  so  pledged  to  it,  as  not  to  be  able  consistently  to 

1  Adams,  New  England  Federalism,  223. 


252  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

depart  from  it.  The  non-intercourse  would  take  away  from 
them  a  great  part  of  the  two  impostures  by  which  they  have 
been  playing  upon  the  jealousies  of  the  people,  that  the  ad- 
ministration act  under  the  dictates  of  France,  and  that  they 
intend  the  total  annihilation  of  commerce. 

I  do  not  mean  that  it  would  entirely  remove  these  despica- 
ble calumnies,  for  popular  jealousy,  like  individual  jealousy, 
will  feed  and  thrive  upon  trifles  lighter  than  air;  but  the  ma- 
chine would  not  work  so  well  under  the  non-intercourse  sys- 
tem, as  they  will  under  the  continuance  of  the  embargo. 

I  am  aware  that  in  reply  to  these  observations  there  are 
many  forcible  reasons  which  may  be  alleged  for  persevering, 
precisely  in  the  stand  which  we  have  taken.  We  are  sure 
that  will  not  produce  war,  for  both  France  and  England  have 
avowed  that  they  do  not  consider  it  as  a  cause  of  war.  It 
would  have  the  appearance  of  a  more  steady  and  determinate 
purpose,  and  it  would  not  expose  to  foreign  depredation  that 
property,  and  to  impressment  and  captivity  those  seamen, 
which  have  hitherto  been  preserved.  Legislative  delibera- 
tion, and  mutual  communication  of  ideas  and  information 
between  those  members  of  the  executive  and  legislature, 
who  concur  in  the  pursuit  of  the  same  end,  will  doubtless 
shed  on  the  whole  subject  a  light,  by  which  you  will  at  last 
most  safely  proceed.  That  it  may  ultimately  secure  our 
peace,  independence  and  union,  I  confidently  hope  and  fer- 
vently pray. 

The  proceedings  of  our  legislature,  relative  to  the  choice 
of  presidential  electors,  will  come  before  you  at  the  proper 
time.  They  are  unprecedented,  and  the  precedent  they  ex- 
hibit is  a  very  bad  one.  A  suspicious  temper  would  conclude 
that  this  mode  of  proceeding  was  adopted  for  the  express 
purpose  of  producing  a  new  collision  between  the  State  and 
the  Union.  This  purpose,  however,  will  I  hope  be  frustrated. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  253 

There  may  be  a  great  constitutional  question,  how  far  the 
authority  of  Congress  extends  with  regard  to  the  rejection  of 
votes  returned  from  the  States  for  the  presidential  election; 
and  although  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  State  legislature  on 
these  proceedings  have  violated  our  own  constitution,  yet 
I  should  wish  if  possible  to  avoid  stirring  the  other  question 
upon  these  returns.  The  most  prudent  course  in  my  mind 
will  be  to  receive  the  votes,  and  count  them,  leaving  it  to 
the  people  of  this  Commonwealth,  if  they  think  proper,  to 
vindicate  their  own  constitution  from  the  outrages  of  their 
own  representatives.  Of  this,  however,  you,  who  will  be  on 
the  spot  and  acting  under  the  responsibility  of  your  public 
trust,  will  decide  with  full  consideration. 

I  have,  my  dear  sir,  according  to  your  desire  given  you  my 
opinions  in  the  fullest  confidence  and  sincerity.  It  will  give 
me  pleasure  to  hear  from  you  as  often  as  your  leisure  will 
permit,  and  with  unabated  ardor  for  the  cause  of  our  coun- 
try, I  remain,  &c. 

P.  S.  In  using  the  term  lories  in  this  letter  I  mean  to 
designate  the  partisans  for  a  French  war  and  for  submission 
to  Great  Britain.  They  do  not  include  the  whole  federal 
party,  but  they  now  'preside  over  its  policy.  They  are 
the  political  descendants  in  direct  line  from  the  tories  of 
our  Revolutionary  war,  and  hold  most  of  their  speculative 
opinions. 

i 

TO  ORCHARD  COOK 

BOSTON,  November  25,  1808. 
DEAR  SIR: 

Your  obliging  letter,  with  the  message  at  the  opening  of 
the  session,  and  a  copy  of  the  public  documents  communi- 
cated with  the  message,  have  been  duly  received;  and  also 


254  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

your  motion  to  authorize  arming  by  the  citizens  of  the 
United  States  against  British  and  French  aggressions  upon 
the  seas.1  I  see  with  deep  anxiety,  though  not  with  surprise, 
that  no  gleam  of  light  is  yet  discernible  on  the  horizon  of  our 
public  affairs.  If  the  whole  nation  duly  felt  the  sense  of  its 
own  dignity,  and  there  were  no  partialities  either  to  France 
or  Britain,  my  concern  would  be  incomparably  less;  for  of 
nations  as  well  as  individuals,  it  may  be  justly  said,  that  ad- 
versity is  the  trier  of  spirits,  and  we  have  grown  so  plethoric 
upon  prosperity,  that  the  other  face  of  fortune  was  necessary 
to  remind  us  that  we  are  not  exempt  from  humanity. 

The  policy  of  removing  the  embargo  laws  without  sub- 
stituting anything  in  their  stead  was  so  obviously  absurd, 
that  I  did  not  expect  it  would  find  many  supporters  in  Con- 
gress.2 To  say  that  every  individual  merchant  and  insurer 
should  be  left  to  judge  of  his  own  risks  is  very  easy,  but  the 
government  is  bound  to  protect  its  citizens  and  their  prop- 
erty upon  the  ocean;  and  when  the  merchants  do  meet  with 
losses  by  the  injustice  of  belligerent  powers,  they  do  call, 
and  they  have  a  right  to  call,  upon  the  government  of  the 
nation  to  interfere  and  maintain  their  rights.  The  flood  of 
memorials  to  Congress  in  the  winter  of  1805  and  1806,  upon 
which  the  non-importation  act  and  Mr.  Pinkney's  mission 
to  England  were  founded,  sufficiently  demonstrate  that  the 
merchants  know  full  well  their  right  to  call  upon  Congress 
to  maintain  their  rights,  and  that  they  are  ready  enough  to 

1  Annals  of  Congress,  loth  Cong.,  2d  Sess.,  495. 

2  "The  feds  in  private  conversation  say,  all  we  have  to  do  is  to  take  off  the  embargo, 
and  let  every  merchant  take  care  of  his  own  concerns  —  that  is,  submission.    I  have 
argued  with  them  that  their  plan  of  permitting  trade  to  regulate  itself  in  their  sense, 
goes  to  render  useless  our  Constitution,  and  indeed  all  government  or  all  union  of 
interests;  and  would  place  us  in  a  worse  state  than  we  were  at  the  time  the  country 
called  for  a  constitution  to  nationalize  us,  and  advance  and  defend  our  commercial 
rights."    Orchard  Cook  to  John  Quincy  Adams,  November  10,  1808.    Ms. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  255 

exercise  it,  when  the  occasion  will  justify  them.  And,  un- 
doubtedly, they  would  do  so  again,  if  their  trade  were  open, 
and  the  French  or  British  should  consequently  take  and  con- 
fiscate their  property.  Nay,  the  very  indulgence  of  Congress 
on  opening  their  trade  would  be  used  by  them  as  an  argument 
for  pledging  the  nation  to  support  them;  they  would  say,  our 
property  was  secured  by  the  embargo  from  foreign  depreda- 
tion; the  Congress  thought  proper  to  remove  that  restriction; 
we  sent  out  our  ships  and  cargoes  on  the  faith  of  this  permis- 
sion, and  they  have  been  seized  and  confiscated.  We  demand 
the  aid  of  the  national  arm  to  recover  and  to  shelter  this 
property.  To  this  claim  what  answer  could  be  given? 
There  could  be  but  one  alternative  —  War,  or  unequivocal 
confession  that  we  have  not,  and  can  not  pretend  to  the 
rights  of  an  independent  nation.  It  is,  therefore,  impossible 
to  throw  the  whole  burden  of  the  controversy  upon  the  cal- 
culations of  mercantile  speculation.  The  rights  of  the 
nation  are  at  stake  upon  it  as  much  as  the  property  of  in- 
dividuals, and  the  Congress  cannot  abandon  the  one  without 
sacrificing  the  other. 

It  is  very  true  that  every  nation  had  a  right  to  lay  a  duty 
upon  exports,  although  by  our  Constitution  the  nation  has 
forbidden  the  exercise  of  that  right.  But  the  questions  be- 
tween Great  Britain  and  us  do  not  in  the  least  implicate  a 
controversy  of  that  principle.  It  is  not  an  export  duty,  but 
a  transit  duty  on  property  bound  elsewhere,  and  which  she 
forcibly  seizes  and  carries  into  her  own  ports,  that  she  now 
requires  and  levies;  it  is  substantially  and  unequivocally 
tribute  for  navigating  the  ocean.  To  this  I  am  not  ready  to 
submit,  and  I  hope  the  nation  will  spurn  at  it  with  resolute 
perseverance. 

I  am  glad  you  have  had  a  satisfactory  explanation  from 
Mr.  Madison  upon  points  on  which  the  British  faction  have 


256  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

endeavored  to  inspire  jealousies  between  the  northern  States 
and  the  rest  of  the  Union.1  It  is  unquestionable  that  the 
points  in  contest  between  us  and  England  are  of  commercial 
rights  and  commercial  interests  —  points  upon  which  the 
welfare  and  prosperity  of  New  England  more  than  that  of 
any  other  portion  of  the  continent  depend. 

29th  November,  1808. 

Since  I  began  this  letter,  we  have  received  the  report  of 
the  Committee  on  Foreign  Relations,  which  exhibits  the 
state  of  our  affairs  in  a  very  concise  and  lucid  manner.2  Its 
moderation  and  its  firmness  will  be  gratifying  to  all  the 
friends  of  the  country,  and  will  not  be  without  their  effect 
upon  some  honest  though  timid  and  wavering  minds.  For 
my  own  person,  I  do  most  sincerely  rejoice  to  find  that  the 
spirit  of  Congress  appears  so  determined  on  the  indispensa- 
ble point  of  maintaining  the  national  rights.  And  after  the 
proper  deliberation  on  the  choice  of  means,  I  shall  cordially 
acquiesce  in  those  which  may  be  finally  determined  upon. 
We  shall  probably  have  difficulty  to  get  along  here  in  peace, 
but  the  rights  of  the  country  must  not  be  abandoned. 

I  congratulate  you  and  still  more  the  country  upon  your 

1  "I  have  lately  conversed  with  Mr.  Madison  to  whom  I  proposed  all  ray  doubts 
as  to  the  partiality  of  administration  to  the  South,  and  to  agriculture,  etc.,  etc. 
He  gave  me  great  satisfaction,  and  observed  that  the  Randolphian  faction  had 
denounced  the  government  solely  because  they  favored  commerce  and  its  rights  so 
much  as  they  did.   That  all  we  contend  for  is  principally  the  interests  of  the  North  — • 
carrying  trade,  impressments,  etc.,  in  particular."     Orchard  Cook  to  John  Quincy 
Adams  ^  November  10,  1808.     Ms. 

2  The  paragraphs  in  the  President's  message  on  foreign  relations  were  referred  to 
a  committee  of  which  George  W.  Campbell  was  chairman.    He  sought  in  vain  for 
guidance  from  Jefferson,  and  Gallatin  prepared  a  report,  which  Campbell  presented 
to  the  House  November  22,  and  became  known  as  "Campbell's  Report."     See 
Henry  Adams,  Writings  of  Gallatin,  I.  435;  History,  IV.  370;  and  American  State 
Papers,  Foreign  Relations,  III.  259. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  257 

reelection,  which  I  hear  is  ascertained.  As  long  as  our  con- 
stituents will  support  us,  we  shall  be  in  no  vital  danger 
from  abroad.  If  the  people  abandon  themselves,  we  shall 
sink  together.  But  I  trust  better  things  from  the  fortitude 
and  energy  of  my  countrymen.  We  shall  triumph  at  the 
last.  I  am,  &c. 

TO  NAHUM  PARKER 

BOSTON,  5  December,  1808. 
DEAR  SIR: 

I  have  this  moment  received  your  favor  of  the  25th  of  last 
month,  inclosing  also  the  report  from  the  Committee  on 
Foreign  Relations.  Before  the  appearance  of  this  document, 
the  inclination  of  my  own  opinion  has  been  that  the  most  ex- 
pedient measure  to  adopt  at  this  time  would  have  been  a 
substitution  of  total  non-intercourse  with  France  and  Eng- 
land, instead  of  continuing  the  embargo.  But  I  perceive  the 
policy  there  recommended  is  superaddition  of  non-intercourse 
to  the  embargo.  The  reasoning  of  the  report  is  so  strong, 
that  I  do  not  see  how  it  can  be  successfully  controverted,  but 
that  there  will  be  internal  difficulties  of  execution  in  case  of  a 
further  continuance  of  the  embargo,  which  I  hope  will  be 
thoroughly  considered  before  the  ultimate  system  shall  be 
decided  upon.  Whatever  shall  be  eventually  determined  will, 
I  have  no  doubt,  be  strongly  supported,  even  in  our  part  of 
the  country,  but  it  must  also  be  prepared  to  meet  a  strong 
and  dangerous  kind  of  opposition. 

I  have  heard  the  rumor  of  an  intention  existing  somewhere, 
to  have  a  convention  called  at  New  Haven,  to  consider  the 
expediency  of  a  division  of  the  States,  or  a  secession  of  New 
England  from  the  Union.1  Knowing  as  I  do  that  such  a 

1  Morison,  Harrison  Gray  Otis,  II.  6. 


258  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

project  has  been  heretofore  seriously  contemplated,  and  that 
it  is  now  avowedly  desired  by  some  persons  whom  I  consider 
as  the  mouth  pieces  of  others  less  communicative  of  their 
designs,  I  perceive  no  absolute  improbability  in  the  report. 
Yet  I  rather  believe  the  purpose  not  yet  sufficiently  matured. 
The  policy  of  a  separation  is,  indeed,  avowed  in  some  quar- 
ters, with  a  sort  of  ostentation  which  indicates  rather  an  ex- 
pectation that  it  will  produce  its  effect  as  a  menace,  than  a 
deliberate  purpose  for  execution.  They  who  use  it  in  this 
view  have  not  yet  learnt  the  necessary  political  lesson,  never 
to  threaten  where  you  do  not  intend  to  strike. 

The  documents  transmitted  with  the  President's  message 
have  produced  an  apparent  effect  upon  the  opinions  of  those, 
who  have  any  candor  left  which  their  feelings  will  suffer  them 
to  exercise.  The  charges  of  partiality  to  France  in  the  con- 
duct of  the  Administration  are,  for  the  present,  not  so  bold, 
and  they  are  more  discredited  than  they  have  been  hereto- 
fore. Jealousy  will  not,  however,  be  convinced,  and  preju- 
dice will  not  weigh  evidence.  In  some  minds  the  forgery  of 
Talleyrand's  letter  is  more  conclusive  than  all  Mr.  Arm- 
strong's correspondence. 

The  greatest  of  all  dangers  to  the  Administration  and  its 
friends  is  that  of  internal  dissension.  The  differences  of 
opinion  relative  to  the  presidential  election  have  contributed 
much  to  increase  this  danger.  It  is,  however,  still  to  be 
hoped  that  when  all  questions  on  the  subject  shall  have  been 
settled  by  the  regular  course  of  the  Constitution,  the  candi- 
dates who  have  been  found  in  the  minority,  with  their 
friends  and  partisans,  will  be  sensible  of  the  common  interest 
and  common  duty  to  maintain  the  cause  of  their  country. 
If  they  firmly  manifest  this  determination,  I  believe  the 
country  will  not  desert  them.  Union  at  the  center  will  send 
forth  shoots  of  vigor  to  every  part  of  the  circumference. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  259 

Whatever  difference  of  opinion  there  may  be  on  the  system 
to  be  adopted,  when  once  resolved  upon  by  the  concurrence 
of  the  majority,  there  must  be  no  hesitation  or  wavering  to 
carry  it  into  effect.  All  must  concur  to  the  extent  of  their 
power.  The  want  of  this  hearty  cooperation  among  its 
friends  has  already  weakened  the  government  infinitely 
more  than  the  inveteracy  of  its  open  opponents.  We  must 
bear  and  forbear,  we  must  conciliate  and  harmonize.  Every 
man  must  set  himself  and  his  pretensions  aside  before  the 
great  interest  of  the  nation.  He  must  sacrifice  the  pride  of 
opinion  and  the  wish  for  safety  by  retreat.  The  cause  is  just 
before  Heaven,  the  stake  is  the  nation's  right.  The  means 
are  the  best  that  honest  intention  and  deliberate  consulta- 
tion can  elaborate.  Persevere,  and  you  will  triumph  at  the 
last. 

I  beg  you,  my  dear  sir,  to  present  my  kind  remembrance 
to  all  those  members  of  the  Senate  with  whom  I  should  have 
rejoiced  to  cooperate  in  the  present  crisis,  as  zealously  and 
as  honestly,  as  I  did  upon  its  approaches  last  winter.  Re- 
leased from  the  perils  and  from  the  honors  of  your  situation, 
I  look  with  the  concern  of  sympathetic  feeling  on  the  re- 
sponsibility with  which  you  are  still  charged,  and  with  the 
sincerest  wish  that  your  services  may  be  successful  and  ac- 
ceptable to  your  country.  At  any  rate  I  can  assure  you  from 
experience,  that  even  to  fail  in  rendering  them  acceptable 
is  no  subject  of  self-displeasure  or  regret,  when  the  conscious- 
ness of  right  intentions  and  of  exertions  to  the  utmost  of  our 
means  remains  unaltered  by  the  event. 

I  am,  &c. 


260  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

TO  ORCHARD  COOK 

BOSTON,  8  December,  1808. 
DEAR  SIR: 

Since  I  had  the  pleasure  of  writing  you  last,  I  have  received 
two  of  your  favors,  the  last  inclosing  your  reply  to  the  resolu- 
tions of  our  legislature  relative  to  the  embargo.1  For  these 
papers,  in  particular  for  you  own  communications,  I  tender 
you  my  sincerest  thanks.  I  will  take  the  earliest  opportunity 
of  forwarding  to  you  a  copy  of  the  pamphlet  you  request,2 
and  if  it  is  to  be  procured  in  town  will  send  it  by  the  same  mail 
with  this. 

On  the  particular  subject  of  your  letter  of  27  November  it 
is  difficult  for  me  either  to  be  totally  silent  or  to  speak  with 
propriety.  I  cannot  be  insensible,  nor  can  I  refuse  myself 
the  pleasure  of  assuring  you  that  I  am  not  insensible,  to  the 
good  opinion  on  your  part  of  me,  which  is  indicated  in  the 
course  you  have  pursued,  and  in  the  wishes  which  you  ex- 
press. The  divisions  however  which  you  intimate  in  the 
anticipation  of  the  election,  I  trust  and  hope  have  not  taken 
place.  The  great  interest  of  the  nation  at  the  present 
moment  requires  harmony  and  conciliation  among  those, 

1  "The  report  and  resolutions  of  a  majority  of  the  legislature  have  passed  and 
been  published  since  I  conversed  with  you.     This  report  contains  doctrines,  rather 
principles  and  opinions,  which  in  my  humble  judgment  are  at  variance  with  the 
rights,  the  honor,  and  the  interests  of  the  country.    What  do  you  think  of  meeting 
with  two  or  three  gentlemen  to  consult  and  consider  whether  it  may  be  useful  and 
advisable  to  express,  either  to  the  government  or  to  the  public,  a  counter  opinion; 
and  if  so,  to  determine  on  the  most  eligible  manner  of  doing  it.    This  report,  to- 
gether with  the  Essex  proceedings,  appears  to  me  to  require  animadversion  and 
notice  of  some  kind  or  other.     I  had  thought  of  commencing  with  three  or  five 
gentlemen  in  whom  confidence  can  be  placed,  and  thence  enlarging  the  circle  as 
should  be  judged  expedient."    William  Eustis  to  John  Quincy  Adams,  November  26, 
1808.    Ms. 

2  The  Whole  Truth. 


i8os]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  261 

who  intend  to  maintain  its  rights.  If  the  Vice  President  and 
his  particular  friends  have  wavered  a  little  more  than  they 
could  justify  to  the  sternest  principles  of  patriotism  upon  the 
recent  system  of  the  present  administration,  the  successful 
candidate  and  his  friends  should  recollect  the  peculiar  situa- 
tion in  which  Mr.  Cflinton]  has  been  placed,  and  make 
allowances  for  the  feelings  of  human  nature.  I  do  not  think 
that  the  Vice  President  and  his  supporters  are  irrecoverably 
gone,  and  I  wish  that  no  just  inducement  should  be  given 
them  to  stray  from  the  path  of  their  country's  necessity. 
Judge  Anderson's  1  anticipation  was  certainly  founded  on 
inaccurate  information.2  I  recollect  with  great  pleasure  the 
cordiality  of  agreement  between  his  sentiments  and  mine  on 
the  public  questions  of  the  last  session,  and  I  beg  you  to 
present  me  kindly  to  his  remembrance.  As  there  can  be  no 
occasion  for  me  to  intimate  what  my  feelings  of  justice  to- 
wards Mr.  C.  would  dictate  on  the  case  supposed,  there 
must  be  affectation  in  the  suggestion  of  them. 

With  regard  to  the  other  possibility  intimated  in  your 
letter,  there  is  perhaps  still  more  of  delicacy  to  be  observed 
by  me.  I  shall  simply  state  to  you  that  my  principle  of  con- 
duct with  regard  to  official  station  always  has  been,  and  con- 
tinues to  be,  that  which  philosophers  teach  us  should  guide 
our  views  of  death  —  never  to  be  desired,  never  to  be 
feared  —  leaving  all  nomination  and  appointment  to  the 
constitutional  organ,  and  reserving  only  to  myself  the  right 
of  answering  as  a  sense  of  duty  may  direct  to  the  call  of  the 
proper  authority. 

From  the  report  of  the  Committee  on  our  Foreign  Relations, 

1  Joseph  Anderson  (1757-1837),  now  a  senator  from  Tennessee,  later  an  adherent 
of  Jackson,  and  Comptroller  of  the  Treasury,  1815-1836. 

2  Anderson  had  said  the  republican  votes  for  Vice  President  would  be  divided 
between  Clinton  and  Adams;  and  Cook,  that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  be  from 
Massachusetts. 


262  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

and  from  some  other  circumstances,  I  had  been  led  to  expect 
that  the  embargo  would  be  continued;  and  although  I  see  the 
thorns  with  which  every  departure  from  that  system  must 
be  beset,  yet  I  incline  to  think  the  course,  which  your  last 
letter  mentions  as  likely  to  be  adopted,  will  be  the  most 
eligible.  It  will  doubtless  increase  the  immediate  danger  of 
foreign  war,  but  it  will  diminish  the  dangers  of  internal 
commotion.  In  case,  indeed,  of  foreign  war,  we  must  be 
blind  not  to  perceive  that  there  will  be  an  internal  foe  to  deal 
with,  as  well  as  the  enemy  beyond  sea,  a  foe  which,  if  cir- 
cumstances should  permit,  will  hang  upon  a  non-intercourse 
or  upon  any  other  measure  of  defence,  as  they  now  do  upon 
the  embargo  and  the  proclamation.  Yet  of  the  party  which 
now  countenances  them  in  their  treachery  to  their  country, 
a  great  proportion  will  abandon  them  in  the  hour  of  extrem- 
ity. The  spirit  of  the  nation,  I  thank  God,  is  not,  and  will 
not  be  broken.  But  the  passions  of  the  people  will  be  less 
dangerous  to  themselves  with  a  vent  upon  to  spend  them 
abroad,  than  where  concentrated  upon  themselves,  as  they 
must  be  by  a  much  longer  continuance  of  the  embargo.  The 
documents  sent  with  the  first  message,  the  report  of  the  Com- 
mittee of  Foreign  Relations,  and  above  all  the  unbroken 
phalanx  of  republicans  on  the  three  resolutions,  have  pro- 
duced a  manifest  effect  upon  the  public  mind  here.1  I  hope 
it  will  continue.  But  there  must  be  some  issue  found  for  the 
restless  spirit,  and  some  guard  against  the  desperation  of 
want.  Heaven  grant  you  may  find  a  safe  one. 
I  am,  etc. 

1  The  first  resolution  in  Campbell's  report  was  adopted  by  a  vote  of  118  to  2-  the 
second,  by  84  to  30;  and  the  third  without  opposition. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  263 

TO  WILLIAM  BRANCH  GILES 

BOSTON,  loth  December,  1808. 

DEAR  SIR: 

I  cannot  postpone  for  a  moment  my  thanks  to  you  for  the 
copy  of  your  speech  l  on  the  resolution  proposed  by  Mr. 
Hillhouse,  to  raise  the  embargo,  and  my  still  warmer  thanks 
as  an  American  citizen  for  the  speech  itself.  If  I  must  lament 
that  in  my  native  section  of  the  Union,  a  concurrence  of  un- 
fortunate circumstances  has  given  prevalence  to  a  political 
system  compounded  of  ignorance  and  treachery  to  the  rights 
of  this  nation,  in  the  spirit  of  sincere  piety  I  thank  God,  that 
able  and  successful  assertors  of  those  rights  are  yet  found  in 
other  quarters,  who  will  not  suffer  that  disgraceful  submis- 
sion to  foreign  insolence  and  outrage,  which  I  have  been 
doomed  to  hear  recommended  by  men,  who  still  pretend  to 
call  themselves  Americans. 

The  threats  of  resistance  against  the  laws  of  the  Union 
and  of  separation,  which  your  subject  called  you  to  notice, 
will  I  hope  counteract  the  dangers  which  they  announce. 
The  people  in  this  quarter  are  in  general  deeply  attached  to 
the  Union,  and  they  have,  as  you  justly  represent,  a  profound 
veneration  for  the  authority  of  the  law.  To  counteract  this 
sentiment,  you  know  that  the  doctrine  has  been  broached 
here  that  the  embargo  laws  were  unconstitutional,  and  as 
such  not  entitled  to  submission.  The  history  of  this  doc- 
trine, and  the  manner  in  which  it  was  propagated  until  the 
decision  of  the  district  judge  at  Salem,2  is  perhaps  not  fully 
known  to  you.  While  you  have  been  candidly  informed  of 
the  regular  gradation  through  petition,  remonstrance  and 

1  November  24.    Annals  of  Congress,  10th  Cong.,  2<d  Sess.,  93. 

2  Judge  John  Davis. 


264  THE  WRITINGS  OF  Ii8o8 

legislative  resolutions,  to  insurrection  and  rebellion  against 
the  Union,  which  are  here  avowed  and  recommended,  you 
have  not  been  told  how  important  a  step  in  the  progress  a 
judicial  decision  against  the  embargo  laws  was  intended  to 
be.  You  have  not  heard  what  means  were  used  and  by 
whom  to  bias  that  decision,  nor  how  much  disappointment 
has  followed  from  that  honest  firmness  and  incorruptible 
integrity  of  our  district  judge.  These  are  things  of  which 
little  will  be  said,  but  whoever  traces  the  real  history  of  our 
advance  towards  resistance  will  not  forget  the  judicial  bat- 
tery, which  has  been  attempted  to  be  brought  into  action,  nor 
fail  to  perceive  the  effect  with  which  it  would  have  operated, 
if  it  could  have  been  brought  to  bear.  In  speaking  of  the 
firmness  and  integrity  of  the  district  judge,  and  of  the  means 
used  to  bias  his  mind,  I  do  not  mean  to  hint  at  any  direct 
attempt  upon  his  honesty,  but  to  a  sort  of  influence  which 
was  certainly  used,  and  which  must  have  had  its  sway  upon 
his  judgment  had  not  his  good  sense  and  his  spirit  been  supe- 
rior to  every  consideration  of  party  management. 

It  is  intimated  to  us  that  the  decision  on  the  motion  of 
Mr.  Hillhouse  will  not  preclude  a  partial  renewal  of  our  com- 
merce, after  the  substitution  of  other  measures  of  resistance 
against  France  and  Britain  shall  have  been  matured. 

My  opinion  that  upon  the  whole  an  opening  of  some  sort 
to  the  humors  as  well  as  to  the  trade  of  the  country  must 
be  made,  continues  and  strengthens  from  day  to  day.  The 
prohibition  of  trade  with  both  belligerents  will  perhaps  not 
be  effectual  to  prevent  it,  but  at  least  it  will  take  away  the 
responsibility  of  the  government,  and  place  it  where  they 
tell  us  it  may  safely  be  placed,  exclusively  at  the  risk  of 
individual  speculators.  It  may  lead  to  war,  but  so  may  the 
non-intercourse  as  a  superaddition  to  the  embargo.  Though 
the  project  of  a  New  England  confederacy  will  meet  with 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  265 

many  obstacles  of  which  its  advisers  are  not  aware,  yet  I 
believe  one  of  the  greatest  of  them  would  be  a  conductor  for 
the  overcharge  of  electricity  in  the  popular  passions.  A 
majority  of  our  people  are  in  that  state  of  temper  which  will 
not  reason,  or  hear  reason;  they  only  feel,  and  the  prevailing 
party  feed  them  with  falsehood  and  suppress  the  truth,  just 
as  it  serves  their  turn. 

Some  accommodation  to  this  state  of  things  I  cannot  but 
hope  will  be  made,  though  God  forbid  that  it  should  be  at  the 
expense  of  any  sacrifice  of  our  essential  rights. 

The  newspapers  will  inform  you  of  the  death  of  our  gov- 
ernor on  Saturday  morning.1  It  will  make  no  change  in  our 
political  aspect  until  our  next  annual  election. 

With  great  respect,  etc. 


TO  SAMUEL  LATHAM  MITCHILL 

BOSTON,   14  December,  1808. 

DEAR  SIR: 

I  duly  received  with  great  pleasure  your  favor  of  the  3rd 
instant.  Recollecting  with  great  satisfaction  the  harmony  of 
political  views,  with  which  during  the  last  and  preceding 
sessions  of  Congress  we  had  acted  together,  and  that  con- 
geniality of  literary  taste  and  sentiment,  which  enabled  me 
to  derive  so  much  instruction  as  well  as  entertainment  from 
our  occasional  hours  of  social  converse,  I  cannot  but  feel 
flattered  with  that  substitute  for  personal  communication, 
which  in  my  present  situation  is  offered  me  by  your  kind 
commencement  of  a  correspondence  by  letters.  I  rejoiced 
also  to  find  that  my  opinions,  under  the  state  of  information 
which  I  can  here  possess,  continue  so  exactly  to  correspond 

1  James  Sullivan  died  December  10,  1808. 


266  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

with  yours  with  regard  to  our  public  affairs.  On  Mr.  Hill- 
house's  motion  I  rejoiced  to  find  that  the  sentiment  and  the 
resolution  of  the  Senate  remain  unbroken.  In  favor  of  his 
resolution  I  saw  but  one  name  which  I  could  have  hoped  not 
to  see  thus  recorded,  and  it  gave  me  very  peculiar  pleasure 
to  see  your  name  still  united  to  the  majority. 

At  the  same  time  I  earnestly  hope  that  some  expedient  will 
immediately  be  devised  to  remove  the  existing  restrictions 
upon  our  trade,  excepting  all  intercourse  with  the  offending 
powers.  There  is  certainly  such  a  change  of  circumstances 
in  the  affairs  of  the  world  since  the  embargo  was  laid,  that 
an  accommodation  to  that  change  would  be  perfectly  con- 
sistent with  the  policy  upon  which  it  was  laid,  and  appears 
to  be  imperiously  required  by  our  own  present  situation.  Its 
effects  have  been  great,  and  on  the  whole  highly  beneficial. 
It  has  preserved  us  from  at  least  a  year  of  war,  and  from 
immense  losses  of  property  and  of  men.  As  a  coercive  meas- 
ure upon  the  belligerents  I  never  had  any  faith  in  it,  nor  do  I 
believe  in  its  efficacy  now.  I  will  not  say  it  cannot  much 
longer  be  executed.  But  if  it  can,  it  must  be  through  diffi- 
culties and  impediments  which  will  aggravate  the  dangers 
and  evils  of  our  situation  more  than  I  am  willing  to  hazard. 
You  will  not  be  surprised  that  these  are  my  sentiments,  when 
you  recollect  the  resolution  which  I  offered  on  the  subject 
so  long  ago  as  last  January.1  The  government  have  now  a 
fair  opportunity  for  changing  their  attitude  of  defence.  But 
if  this  opportunity  should  be  rejected,  another  may  not 
present  itself  until  it  shall  become  a  question  of  force  be- 
tween authority  and  obedience.  As,  therefore,  I  never  could 
agree  to  the  submission  project  of  repealing  the  embargo 
laws,  without  substituting  something  else  to  maintain  our 
natural  rights,  so  I  believe  that  the  very  defence  of  these 

1  Resolution,  January  n,  1808,  p.  187,  supra. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  267 

rights  will  best  be  secured  by  a  change  of  expedient.  I  speak, 
however,  with  submission  to  better  judgment,  and  with  an 
unvaried  desire  to  support  at  every  hazard  whatever  meas- 
ures shall  result  from  the  declaration  of  our  national  councils. 

As  the  proceedings  of  my  masters,  the  legislature  of  Massa- 
chusetts, last  June  satisfied  me  that  I  was  very  ill  suited  to 
continue  the  representative  of  their  majority,  and  as  I  fore- 
saw no  possible  public  injury  from  giving  them  immediately 
the  opportunity  to  be  represented  according  to  their  own 
heart's  desire,  I  resigned  my  place  for  the  remainder  of  the 
term  during  which  I  might  have  kept  it.  But  I  ventured  still 
to  perform  the  duties  of  a  member  of  the  Library  Committee 
until  I  had  expended  the  sum,  which  remained  in  my  hands 
for  that  object.  I  sent  a  box  of  books  which  I  learn  has  been 
received  at  the  library,  and  have  furnished  Mr.  Nourse  an 
account,  which  he  considers  as  sufficiently  vouched  for  set- 
tlement. As  chairman  of  the  committee  I  must  beg  your 
attention  at  the  annual  report  to  have  the  settlement  of  the 
account  completed  in  form,  so  far  as  respects  me.  The  dis- 
charge of  the  duties  assigned  to  me  as  a  member  of  this  com- 
mittee was  among  the  most  pleasing  of  my  official  functions, 
and  almost  the  only  one  the  release  from  which  could  be  to 
me  a  subject  of  personal  regret. 

I  beg  you  to  present  my  respectful  remembrance  to  the 
Vice  President,  to  your  colleague  Mr.  [John]  Smith,  and  to 
any  others  of  our  old  associates  to  whom  it  may  be  agreeable. 
Accept  at  the  same  time  for  yourself  the  assurances  of  my 
friendly  regard,  &c. 


268  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

TO  JOSEPH  ANDERSON 

BOSTON,  15  December,  1808. 

DEAR  SIR: 

Among  the  many  sacrifices  that  I  thought  proper  to  make, 
in  order  to  give  my  very  worthy  but  not  approved  good 
masters  an  immediate  opportunity  of  stamping  on  the  Senate 
of  the  United  States  an  express  image  of  themselves,  was 
that  of  the  pleasure  which  I  had  so  constantly  and  cordially 
enjoyed,  in  cooperating  with  you  in  the  transaction  of  our 
public  affairs,  and  in  the  extra-official  confidence  and  free 
communication  of  sentiments  which  had  supported  and 
guided  me  through  the  perplexities  and  difficulties  of  the 
last  winter  —  a  confidence  and  freedom  which  I  had  flattered 
myself  would  be  revived  and  rendered  still  more  cheering  to 
me  in  the  increasing  difficulties  and  perplexities  of  the  present 
season.  But  when  a  majority  of  my  immediate  constituents 
had  undertaken  to  instruct  their  representatives  to  act  a  part 
very  unsuitable  to  my  feelings,  I  could  not  refuse  to  myself 
the  satisfaction  of  letting  them  know  that  I  was  as  unambi- 
tious of  performing  such  services,  as  they  were  of  assigning 
them  to  me.  To  be  the  organ  of  such  opinions  as  they  had 
avowed  would  have  degraded  me  in  my  own,  far  below  the 
condition  of  a  slave.  To  have  encountered  them  as  a  Senator 
of  the  Union  with  the  honest  and  indignant  dictates  of  my 
soul  would  have  been  my  duty,  but  to  what  end?  When 
Harry  the  4th  of  France  consulted  Sully  on  a  prospect  of 
marriage,  which  in  the  dotage  of  his  lust  he  was  prepared  to 
solemnize  with  one  of  his  mistresses,  and  showed  him  the 
written  promise  to  that  effect  which  he  had  drawn  up,  Sully 
without  answering  a  word  flung  the  paper  in  the  fire.  "Are 
you  mad,  Sully?  "  said  the  King  to  his  bold  but  faithful  min- 


i8o8j  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  269 

ister.  "Yes,  Sire,"  was  the  reply,  "  and  would  to  God  I  were 
the  only  madman  in  the  case."  If  by  flinging  the  resolutions 
of  my  constituents  in  the  fire  I  could  have  saved  them  the 
disgrace  of  having  pledged  themselves  to  their  contents  in 
the  face  of  the  world  and  of  posterity,  I  would  have  hazarded 
the  reproach  of  madness  or  of  worse  to  have  redeemed  them 
from  their  ignominious  vassalage.  But  I  could  not,  like 
Sully,  defeat  their  purpose  by  withstanding  their  will.  If 
I  could  not  hide  their  shame,  I  felt  that  it  was  not  for  me  to 
aggravate  or  proclaim  it. 

It  is  true,  that  I  felt  with  extreme  reluctance  the  obliga- 
tion of  abandoning  the  service  which  it  might  still  have  been 
in  my  power  to  render  to  my  country  during  the  remnant  of 
the  term  that  was  left.  But  in  estimating  as  highly  as  my 
conscience  would  allow  my  own  importance  as  a  member  of 
the  Senate,  I  could  not  forbear  the  question  to  myself,  how 
will  that  body  be  composed,  on  the  supposition  that  my  own 
important  self  should  be  withdrawn  from  its  deliberations. 
The  moment  the  question  occurred  to  my  mind,  that  moment 
my  resolution  to  resign  was  decided.  Firm,  deliberate  and 
inflexibly  patriotic  as  I  knew  five-sixths  of  that  body  would 
be  on  the  trial,  my  extremest  self-complacency  could  see 
nothing  in  the  substitution  of  my  successor  for  me  but  the 
loss  of  one  vote  to  the  country,  and  the  gain  of  one  vote  to 
the  opposition.  If  then  I  did  abandon  you,  it  was  from  the 
perfect  conviction  that  you  were  too  strong  to  need  any 
assistance  of  mine.  For  be  assured,  if  the  odds  had  not  been 
so  unequivocally  decisive,  had  the  division  of  numbers  been 
so  nearly  equal  that  in  any  probability  a  vote  would  have 
been  of  consequence  in  the  questions  involving  the  rights 
of  the  nation,  highly  as  I  reverenced  the  authority  of  my 
constituents,  and  bitter  as  would  have  been  the  cup  of  re- 
sistance to  their  declared  will,  I  would  not  have  yielded  up 


270  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

my  trust  until  the  moment  when  it  was  to  be  taken  from  my 
hands;  I  would  have  defended  their  interests  against  their 
inclinations,  and  incurred  every  possible  addition  to  their 
resentment,  to  save  them  from  the  vassalage  of  their  own  de- 
lusions. I  did  not  think  the  occasion  required  this  extraor- 
dinary exertion  of  my  energy,  and  while  I  was  determined 
never  to  be  instrumental  of  such  measures  as  they  chose  to 
dictate,  I  thought  myself  fairly  authorized  to  indulge  them 
in  the  benefit  of  an  immediate  change  in  their  representation. 
The  event  has  shown  that  in  my  calculation  of  the  firmness 
and  magnanimity  of  the  Senate  I  was  not  mistaken.  The 
system  of  submission  to  British  insolence  and  usurpation, 
which  has  been  preached,  and  prayed,  and  resolved,  and 
petitioned,  and  remonstrated,  in  this  part  of  the  country  for 
the  last  eighteen  months,  finds  in  the  Senate,  thanks  be  to 
God,  the  same  invincible  spirit  of  resistance  which  it  found 
at  the  last  session  of  Congress.  The  will  and  influence  of  my 
constituents  has  had  its  full  constitutional  range,  and  they 
have  had  the  best  opportunity  to  manage  their  concerns  in 
their  own  way.  You  have  now  had  announced  to  you  with 
due  formality  the  process  of  resistance,  which  MAY  BE  pur- 
sued against  your  laws.  So  that  at  least  if  an  attempt  to 
divide  the  Union  should  be  made,  you  will  have  no  cause  to 
complain  of  being  taken  by  surprise.  Now  if  I  had  remained 
with  you,  instead  of  threatening  insurrection  and  separation, 
I  would  only  have  expressed  my  utter  abhorrence  of  every 
such  attempt  and  project,  however  colored  and  from  what 
cause  soever  intended.  My  sentiments  with  regard  to  the 
Union  are  well  known  to  you.  John  Smith  and  Aaron  Burr 
were  in  my  view  my  fellow-citizens,  just  as  if  they  had  been 
natives  of  Boston;  and  if  any  native  of  Boston,  in  pursuit 
of  the  same  end  which  Burr  and  Smith  were  aiming  at,  should 
proceed  as  far  in  its  execution,  I  would  as  far  as  my  power 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  271 

extended  treat  him  in  the  same  manner,  as  I  thought  they 
ought  to  have  been  treated.  I  believe  it  will  be  better  for 
you  and  for  the  whole  nation  to  have  men  from  this  quarter 
who  will  prepare  you  for  what  they  mean  to  attempt,  than 
one  who,  feeling  and  believing  that  we  have  all  but  one  com- 
mon interest,  could  avow  no  other  interest  as  representing 
this  section  of  the  Union. 

We  have  at  this  time  neither  ears  nor  tongues  for  anything 
that  comes  from  the  seat  of  government,  but  for  what  con- 
cerns the  embargo.  Mr.  Gallatin's  letter  to  the  committee,1 
and  the  bill  reported  in  conformity  to  it,  furnish  materials  to 
the  disaffected,  which  they  are  using  with  great  industry. 
For  my  own  part  I  consider  the  bill  as  merely  a  project  for 
discussion,  which  I  have  no  idea  of  seeing  pass  into  a  law. 
If  it  should,  it  is  my  clear  opinion  that  it  will  not  be  executed 
in  this  quarter  of  the  Union  by  the  ordinary  process.  Juries, 
judges  and  militia  will  all  fail  to  perform  their  parts,  and  the 
bayonet  will  be  as  ineffectual  to  execute  the  law  as  the  rest. 
You  know  that  in  saying  this  my  motive  is  not  that  of  in- 
timidation or  of  opposition,  but  to  tell  you  candidly  the  state 
of  things  here.  Substitute  a  non-intercourse  with  both  the 
offending  powers  as  strong  and  effectual  as  you  can  make  it, 
but  open  a  passage  for  the  imprisoned  vapors.  A  non- 
intercourse  may  lead  to  war  with  England  or  France,  but 
the  extension  of  the  embargo  system  to  the  measures  recom- 
mended in  Mr.  Gallatin's  letter  will  infallibly  meet  with 
direct  resistance,  which  nothing  but  force  will  overpower. 
The  project  of  Mr.  Hillhouse's  resolutions  and  of  Mr.  Gal- 
latin's  letter  form  to  me  the  two  extremes  of  possible  policy, 
neither  of  which  will  meet  the  ultimate  views  of  the  legis- 
lature. Of  unqualified  repeal,  that  is,  submission,  it  seems 

1  Gallatin  to  Giles,  November  24,  1808.     Writings  of  Gallatin,  I.  428.     The  bill 
was  introduced  December  8. 


272  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

to  me  the  very  proposers  in  both  houses  are  ashamed.  From 
their  British  ground,  they  have  been  fairly  driven.  They  now 
profess  the  will  to  maintain  the  rights  of  the  nation,  and 
confess  the  wrongs  even  of  England.  Meet  them  if  you  can 
upon  their  present  professions.  Guard  against  the  surrender 
of  our  rights,  but  assert  and  exercise  them  again.  Such  was 
the  inclination  of  my  sentiment  when  Congress  first  met. 
Everything  confirms  me  in  it.  No  doubt  the  opposition  will 
continue  to  every  measure  you  may  take.  But  it  will  be  far 
less  dangerous  with  a  non-intercourse  and  a  partial  revival 
of  commerce,  than  under  the  total  interdiction  of  trade. 

Let  me  hear  from  you  as  often  as  your  leisure  and  conven- 
ience will  permit,  and  believe  me,  &c. 

TO  ORCHARD  COOK 

BOSTON,  I9th  December,  1808. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

I  have  to  thank  you  for  your  favor  of  the  4th  instant, 
which  I  received  some  days  since,  but  which  various  avoca- 
tions of  necessity  have  hitherto  prevented  me  from  answer- 
ing. 

My  opinion  that  the  embargo  must  be  removed,  (I  mean 
partially,  and  after  the  substitution  of  other  measures 
against  the  French  and  British  decrees,)  becomes  more  and 
more  confirmed  from  day  to  day.  It  is  much  more  strongly 
corroborated  by  the  letter  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 
to  the  committee  of  the  Senate,  marking  out  the  additional 
measures  necessary  for  carrying  it  into  effect,  than  it  was 
before.  Indeed  the  appearance  of  that  letter,  and  of  the  bill 
founded  upon  it,  rather  leads  me  to  expect  a  result  of  a  dif- 
ferent kind. 

My  observations  in  my  letter  to  Mr.  Bacon  relative  to 


i8os]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  273 

arming  were  intended  to  apply  merely  to  the  solitary  per- 
mission to  merchant  vessels.  As  to  fitting  out  and  equipping 
all  the  armed  vessels  we  have,  and  building  and  equipping 
more,  I  remain  of  the  same  opinion  I  have  always  entertained. 
But  if  merchant  vessels  are  permitted  to  sail  armed  under 
a  non-intercourse  system  and  under  these  belligerent  de- 
crees, it  should  be  upon  a  plan  like  that  of  Mr.  Dana's  resolu- 
tion,1 by  means  of  convoys  and  under  cautious  regulations. 

I  have  never  heard,  except  from  your  letter,  of  any  con- 
vention of  merchants  in  Boston  agreeing  to  wait  till  1st 
January,  and  no  longer.  I  have  heard  of  some  such  things 
as  resolved  upon  by  individual  merchants  in  your  district, 
but  I  hope  the  report  is  without  foundation.  As  the  embargo 
is  unpopular,  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  all  the  popularity 
seekers  will  drop  from  its  support,  and  become  the  most 
violent  declaimers  against  it.  It  will  be  the  machine  by 
which  the  turncoats  will  reconcile  themselves  to  the  majority. 
It  seems  to  me  that  there  is  no  measure  by  which  the  admin- 
istration could  lose  so  many  of  its  friends  in  this  quarter, 
as  by  an  unyielding  adherence  to  this  particular  restriction. 
The  projectors  of  Disunion,  of  French  war,  and  of  British 
alliance,  will  take  such  advantage  of  the  current  as  the  time 
will  allow.  They  certainly  will  not  succeed  either  by  the 
wisdom  or  the  patriotism  of  their  policy.  But  the  inflexibility 
of  the  ruling  party  at  Washington,  if  they  do  not  exhibit 
some  token  of  accommodation,  will  play  the  game  into  their 
hands,  infinitely  better  than  they  can  play  it  for  themselves. 

I  have  seen  a  short  minute  of  your  speech  on  the  subject, 
and  hope  soon  to  have  a  full  report  of  it.  We  have  received 
here  a  great  plenty  of  speeches  in  pamphlets,  but  all,  ex- 
cepting that  of  Mr.  Giles,  on  the  other  side  of  the  question. 
When  I  see  one  gentleman  delivered  of  a  long  pamphlet  to 

1  Annals  of  Congress,  loth  Cong.,  2d  Sess.,  510. 


274  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

prove  that  all  our  difficulties  are  owing  to  the  new  importa- 
tion act;  another,  gravely  demonstrating  that  it  is  because 
we  did  not  chastise  the  Spaniards  for  seizing  the  Kempers,1 
and  a  third,  calculating  by  decimal  fractions  and  the  infinite 
series,  how  many  miles  of  free  trade  would  be  left  us,  if  we 
would  but  live  upon  them  as  the  Lazarus  under  the  table 
of  Britain,  I  cannot  but  remember  a  fable  which  I  learnt 
in  my  spelling  book,  when  a  child,  of  the  tradesmen  who  con- 
sulted together  on  the  defence  of  their  town  when  it  was  be- 
sieged. 

The  blacksmith  was  for  iron,  the  joiner  for  wood,  and  the 
currier  insisted  that  for  the  walls  of  a  fortress  there  was 
nothing  like  leather.  We  are  informed  of  the  decision  on  the 
first  resolution  reported  by  the  Foreign  Committee,  and  I  am 
very  glad  that  so  many  of  the  members,  who  made  such  long 
speeches  against  it,  finished  by  voting  for  it.  For  although  I 
know  that  this  vote  pledges  no  man  to  vote  for  any  special 
measure  of  resistance,  yet  it  is  much  to  see  that  on  being 
brought  to  the  test,  no  man  in  Congress  dares  by  his  vote 
justify  the  outrages  of  Great  Britain,  as  we  see  it  hourly  at- 
tempted out  of  doors.  The  two  gentlemen  who  voted  against 
the  resolution  had,  no  doubt,  reasons  satisfactory  to  them- 
selves. I  am  persuaded  it  was  not  that  they  thought  we 
ought  to  submit  to  the  decrees  either  of  England  or  France. 

We  have  at  last  really  lost  our  governor,  who  had  already 
been  repeatedly  buried  in  the  newspapers,  and  who  has  in 
fact  been  several  months  dying.  Your  letter  arrived  too 
late  for  me  to  take  any  step  on  the  subject  which  you  men- 
tioned with  him.  Of  the  present  chief  magistrate  2 1  presume 
you  have  no  doubt. 

Your  reply  has  not  been  attacked  in  such  a  manner  as  to 

1  American  State  Papers,  Foreign  Relations,  II.  684. 

2  Levi  Lincoln. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  275 

need  any  defence.  I  have  heard  it  mentioned  with  com- 
mendation by  many  whose  party  feelings  by  no  means  ac- 
cord with  it.  You  will  readily  believe  it  agreed  with  my 
sentiments.  I  could  have  wished  only,  that  the  unconstitu- 
tionality  of  a  State  legislature  ever  requesting  the  representa- 
tatives  of  the  people  in  Congress  to  use  their  influence  this 
or  that  way,  had  been  exposed  a  little  more  at  large.  For  I 
hold  these  requests,  which  sound  so  much  like  commands,  to 
be  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  principles  of  the  Constitu- 
tion both  of  the  Union  and  of  the  State,  and  there  is  danger, 
if  they  are  not  checked  in  time,  that  they  may  acquire  a  sort 
of  prescriptive  authority.  I  was  very  glad,  therefore,  to 
see  you  asserting  your  constitutional  independence  and  re- 
minding the  legislature  that  you  were  not  responsible  to 
them. 

There  is  this  evening  a  meeting  of  republicans  friendly  to 
the  government  in  the  several  wards  of  this  town.  Their 
object  is  announced  to  be  for  the  purpose  of  expressing  their 
sentiments  of  adherence  to  the  administration  and  its  meas- 
ures. This  movement,  I  suppose,  will  not  stand  alone.  But 
how  it  will  be  followed  up  or  to  what  effect  I  do  not  know. 

What  is  the  foundation  of  the  report  that  the  tribute  or 
export  duty  under  the  British  Orders  of  Council  is  aban- 
doned ?  If  true  it  will  somewhat  change  the  aspect  of  affairs. 
Not  that  it  can  reconcile  us  to  the  other  parts  of  these  orders, 
but  that  it  will  be  a  great  step  towards  their  total  abandon- 
ment. That  and  a  single  defeat  in  Spain  would  bring  down 
the  tone  of  Mr.  Canning,  whose  sarcastic  insolence,  as  Mr. 
Giles  so  justly  calls  it,  will  I  have  no  doubt  yet  be  scourged 
into  himself.  In  Spain,  however,  the  present  prospects  are 
very  much  in  their  favor. 

I  am,  &c. 


276  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

TO  EZEKIEL  BACON 

BOSTON,  21  st  December,   1808. 

MY  DEAR  SIR: 

It  would  certainly  be  more  safe  and  prudent  for  me  to 
imitate  that  reserve,  which  you  notice  as  marking  the  com- 
munications of  some  other  friends  at  the  present  crisis. 
Thus  much  I  may  say  with  perfect  security. 

The  path  of  the  nation  is  so  thickly  set  with  difficulties 
and  dangers,  the  choice  of  practicable  measures  is  confined  to 
evils  all  of  such  magnitude  and  terror,  that  every  man,  not 
bound  by  the  duties  of  a  public  trust  to  contribute  in  devising 
expedients  to  procure  public  relief,  will  most  naturally  shrink 
from  the  utterance  of  an  opinion,  what  ought  to  be  done. 
Like  the  Irishman  on  board  the  ship,  when  called  to  aid  in 
extinguishing  the  fire,  one  feels  an  irresistible  temptation  to 
answer,  "I  am  but  a  passenger."  Yet  so  long  as  the  reflec- 
tions of  my  mind,  or  the  observation  I  have  opportunity  to 
make,  are  acceptable  to  you,  I  shall  not  withhold  them;  for 
in  truth  it  is  a  time  when  the  passenger  must  lend  his  hand 
as  much  as  any  of  the  crew,  and  in  giving  to  you  freely  my 
thoughts,  crude  and  undigested  as  they  are,  I  must  add  that 
you  can  scarcely  give  less  confidence  to  them  than  I  have  in 
them  myself. 

I  have  observed,  as  far  as  newspapers  and  pamphlets  have 
furnished  opportunity,  the  course  of  deliberation  both  in 
your  house  and  in  the  Senate  since  the  commencement  of 
the  session.  Though  I  will  not  pretend  to  deny  that  I  have 
my  partialities  of  sentiments,  impelling  me  to  concur  with 
one  side  and  to  differ  from  the  other,  I  have  anxiously  sought 
from  the  arguments  of  both  a  footing,  upon  which  I  could 
think  it  possible  for  the  nation  to  stand.  Together  with 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  277 

! 

much  crimination  and  recrimination,  which  perhaps  could 
not  well  be  avoided  on  either  side,  but  which  I  regretted  to 
see,  because  I  thought  it  could  answer  no  good  purpose,  and 
must  naturally  inflame  those  mutual  irritations  which  should 
rather  be  soothed,  I  have  found  on  both  sides  some  leading 
ideas  from  which  public  benefit  might  perhaps  be  derived. 
The  excessive  precipitancy  with  which  our  New  England 
federalists  made  their  charge  upon  the  embargo  at  the 
opening  of  the  session  had,  I  am  afraid,  a  tendency  to  rouse 
the  spirit  of  counteraction  beyond  the  tone  of  cool  delibera- 
tion, and  to  prepossess  too  much  the  friends  of  the  adminis- 
tration against  the  measure  under  any  modification.  The 
report  of  the  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations  (of  which  I 
think  you  were  a  member,)  was  in  my  opinion  a  production 
of  uncommon  excellence,  but  it  contained  sC  concession, 
upon  which  the  federalists  seized  with  the  convulsive  instinct 
of  drowning  men  to  save  themselves  from  the  infamy  to 
which  their  system  of  submission  was  hurrying  them.  The 
concession  to  which  I  refer  is,  that  a  permanent  embargo 
would  be  an  abandonment  of  the  very  right  for  which  we 
are  contending.  For  this  primary  idea  they  are  indebted  to 
yourselves.  But  they  have  turned  it  against  the  embargo 
system  with  some  address,  and  with  considerable  effect.  The 
idea  is  substantially  true,  and  to  my  mind  affords  an  un- 
answerable argument  for  substituting,  as  speedily  as  possible, 
something  instead  of  the  embargo. 

The  most  decisive  reason  in  my  mind  for  this  substitution 
is  that  which  I  have  heretofore  suggested  to  you.  The  law 
will  not  be  executed.  It  will  be  resisted  under  the  organized 
sanction  of  State  authority.  Already,  notwithstanding  the 
decision  of  the  district  judge  on  the  constitutionality  of  the 
existing  laws,  the  juries  will  not  convict  for  violations  against 
them.  Constitutional  objections  will  recur  with  tenfold 


278  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

greater  force  against  the  contemplated  additional  laws,  and 
you  will  soon  find  State  judges  undertaking  to  decide  these 
questions  in  their  way.  Consider  the  complication  of  the  case : 
Two  or  three  file  leaders  of  disappointed  ambition,  hopeless 
of  consequence  under  the  present  national  union  and  building 
their  castles  of  personal  aggrandizement  upon  a  separation 
and  a  British  alliance.  Under  these  file-leaders,  an  organized 
concert  of  banks  and  other  monied  corporations  holding  great 
numbers  of  secondary  characters  in  a  state  of  dependence, 
by  the  return  of  discount  days,  and  thus  commanding  their 
inaction,  if  not  their  assistance.  A  legislature  perfectly 
under  their  guidance.  A  State  judiciary,  of  which  you  must 
think  what  I  cannot  say.  A  militia  so  commanded  as 
at  least  not  likely  to  oppose  much  obstacle  to  these  views, 
and  a  plan  long  since  formed  to  seize  the  first  favorable  op- 
portunity to  divide  the  State,  and  set  up  a  New  England  con- 
federacy. What  an  engine  in  the  hands  of  these  people  is  a 
system  of  restriction,  which  turns  all  the  political  humors  of 
your  political  body  inward.  Gentlemen  in  Congress  have 
said  they  are  unwilling  to  suppose  the  case  of  forcible  re- 
sistance to  the  laws,  but  that  if  it  should  happen,  they  would 
use  the  cautery  and  the  knife.  But  if  you  continue  and  ag- 
gravate these  laws,  you  must  suppose  the  case  or  you  will 
impose  them  under  an  erroneous  view  of  the  state  of  things. 
When  Caesar  was  approaching  with  his  army  from  Gaul, 
Pompey  refused  to  suppose  the  case,  that  he  would  cross  the 
Rubicon,  and  for  thus  refusing  to  suppose  the  case,  was  ut- 
terly unprepared  to  oppose  him  when  he  came.  It  is  easy  to 
talk  of  using  the  cautery  and  the  knife,  more  easy  than  to 
use  them  in  reality.  But  it  is  the  very  necessity  of  using  them 
which  I  would  at  almost  any  other  hazard  avoid. 

Let  not  the  administration  flatter  itself  with  much  support 
from  those  whom  it  considers  as  its  friends.    Many  of  them 


i8os]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  279 

were  friends  of  the  summer,  friends  as  long  as  favors  were  to 
be  obtained,  and  the  popular  gale  blew  with  them.  I  know 
that  some  of  the  most  eminent  among  them  are  wavering,  to 
say  the  least.  I  know  that  some  of  them  are  men,  who  con- 
nect with  all  public  considerations  much  calculation  for 
themselves.  The  day  when  these  will  fail,  will  be  precisely 
the  day  of  trial.  Excuse  me  for  saying  thus  much.  It  is  not 
for  the  purpose  of  exciting  distrust,  but  to  state  the  actual 
condition  of  things,  upon  which  all  useful  public  council  must 
be  founded. 

I  feel  the  more  anxious  that  the  determination  to  revive 
commercial  enterprise  should  now  be  taken  by  the  govern- 
ment, because  it  will  now  be  a  voluntary  act,  because  all  the 
objects  for  which  the  embargo  was  avowed  to  be  laid  have 
been  obtained.  We  have  secured  all  the  property  which  was 
exposed,  and  we  have  made  such  use  of  the  measure  in  nego- 
tiation as  was  intended.  It  cannot  again  be  used  in  negotia- 
tion, and  although  it  may  still  preserve  property  from  cap- 
ture, it  can  no  longer  save  any  from  sudden  and  unexpected 
rapine.  If  persisted  in  now,  I  see  not  when  the  government 
can  consistently  abandon  it  hereafter.  As  coercion  either 
against  France  or  England  I  cannot  believe  in  its  efficacy. 
It  affects  their  interests  no  doubt,  but  nations  which  sacrifice 
men  by  the  hundred  thousand,  and  treasure  by  the  hundred 
millions  in  war  for  nothing,  or  worse  than  nothing,  pay  little 
attention  to  their  real  interests.  It  is  said  to  have  been  the 
only  error  in  the  political  character  of  John  DeWitt,  that  he 
supposed  France  and  England  could  always  act  upon  meas- 
ures according  to  their  effect  upon  their  interests.  There  can 
be  no  greater  error  than  to  proceed  upon  such  calculations. 
Nine  times  out  of  ten  you  might  more  safely  reverse  the  rule, 
and  conclude  that  if  a  measure  is  clearly  for  the  interest  of 
the  nation,  the  government  will  reject  it. 


280  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

If  it  be  true  that  the  British  government  have  already 
abandoned  the  transit  duty,  they  will  not  venture  to  carry 
the  remainder  of  their  Orders  in  Council  into  effect.  If, 
after  we  open  our  ports,  the  British  should  take  and  carry  in 
our  ships,  the  resentments  of  the  sufferers  and  of  our  people 
will  fall  much  more  upon  them  and  less  upon  our  own  gov- 
ernment, than  they  now  do,  and  if  they  should  proceed  in 
their  career  of  violence,  we  have  yet  other  resources  for  in- 
demnifying the  losses  which  our  people  might  sustain  and 
for  checking  the  execution  of  their  system.  One  outward 
effect  of  our  present  situation  is,  that  by  securing  our  com- 
mercial capital  from  the  operation  of  the  British  orders,  we 
take  away  all  their  practical  mischief,  and  of  course  much  of 
their  odious  character.  We  render  the  orders  themselves  a 
dead  letter,  but  our  own  restriction  takes  place  of  all  their 
prohibitions.  Now  if  we  let  our  merchants  go  to  sea  again, 
if  the  British  take  and  confiscate  their  property,  the  passions 
as  well  as  the  reason  of  our  people  will  act  against  them.  If 
they  do  not  capture,  it  must  be  because  they  will  not  dare  to 
give  their  system  full  effect. 

I  am  aware  of  the  powerful  arguments  which  are  urged  for 
adhering  precisely  to  the  embargo  system,  and  I  am  con- 
vinced that  if  such  should  be  the  final  result,  it  will  be  de- 
cided with  the  best  intentions.  My  best  wishes  will  be  with 
you,  and  a  disposition  to  make  every  allowance  for  the  diffi- 
culties of  the  choice,  which  I  know  to  be  just  and  necessary. 
I  am,  &C.1 

1  The  fact  of  this  correspondence  became  known  and  gave  occasion  to  newspaper 
comment.  The  democratic  representatives  from  Massachusetts  have  received  a 
letter  from  Mr.  John  Quincy  Adams,  announcing  to  them  that  the  embargo  must 
be  given  up,  or  democracy  dies  forever  in  the  east.  Mr.  Story  and  Mr.  Bacon  have 
taken  the  alarm,  and  are  preparing  to  discover  that  this  wise  and  powerful  measure, 
*  however  honorable  to  the  sages  with  whom  it  originated,'  as  the  former  gentleman 
has  said,  is  not  so  coercive  upon  foreign  powers  as  those  sages  had  led  them  to 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  281 

TO  WILLIAM  BRANCH  GILES 

BOSTON,  26th  December,  1808. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

I  received  your  very  obliging  favor  of  the  lyth  instant,  with 
a  copy  of  your  second  speech  on  Mr.  Hillhouse's  proposed 
resolution.  For  the  notice  you  have  taken  of  myself  person- 
ally I  beg  you  to  accept  my  thanks.  For  myself,  I  believe  I 
shall  never  think  Mr.  Pickering's  suspicions  or  insinuations 
against  me  deserving  of  any  sentiment  more  earnest  or  active 
than  contempt.1 

believe.  There  are  many  strong  indications  of  an  approaching  rebellion  against 
'the  anti-commercial  system  of  Confucius  the  Younger,'  in  a  quarter  where  nothing 
but  the  most  abject  submission  was  expected."  Freeman's  Journal,  quoted  in 
New-England  Palladium,  January  10,  1809. 

1  "  I  have  designedly  delayed  answering  your  friendly  and  interesting  letter  of  the 
[  ]  until  I  could  accompany  the  reply  with  some  observations,  I  felt  myself 
bound  to  make  in  your  justification  a  few  days  since.  Indeed  my  principal  object  in 
rising  was  to  defend  you  against  the  most  illiberal  and  unmerited  reproaches.  I 
wish  I  may  have  performed  this  agreeable  task  to  your  satisfaction;  if  I  have  failed 
of  success,  it  was  not  for  the  want  of  good  intention."  William  B.  Giles  to  John 
Quincy  Adams,  December  9,  1808.  Ms.  Pickering  made  a  speech  on  Hillhouse's 
resolution,  November  30,  in  the  course  of  which  he  seems  to  have  reflected  upon 
Adams.  The  printed  report  makes  no  mention  of  Adams,  but  the  remarks  directed 
against  him  are  those  printed  on  page  185  of  the  Annals  of  Congress.  In  reply 
Giles  said,  December  2: 

"I  should  not  have  taken  the  trouble  of  this  examination,  if  the  gentleman  from 
Massachusetts  (Mr.  Pickering)  had  not  availed  himself  of  this  occasion  to  assail  the 
reputation  of  his  late  colleague  (Mr.  Adams)  —  a  gentleman  who  represented  the 
State  of  Massachusetts  with  so  much  honor  to  himself  and  advantage  to  the  State 
and  nation;  upon  a  point,  too,  in  which  the  gentleman  here  present  has  put  himself 
so  clearly  in  the  wrong,  from  his  own  showing.  I  had  hoped,  Mr.  President,  that 
the  gentleman  would  have  so  far  restrained  his  feelings  as  to  have  permitted  this 
gentleman's  retirement  to  have  shielded  him  from  these  unmerited  reproaches; 
but  it  now  seems  that  no  delicacy  of  situation  can  procure  an  exemption  from  the 
inveteracy  of  the  gentleman's  passions.  This  cruel  attack  has  imposed  upon  me  an 
indispensable  obligation  to  defend  this  absent  gentleman;  and  it  has  been  principally 
this  circumstance  which  has  driven  me  again  most  reluctantly  into  this  debate. 


282  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

It  was,  indeed,  of  importance  to  him  to  crowd  upon  the 
world,  if  he  possibly  could,  the  falsehood  that  the  British 
Orders  of  Council  were  not  among  the  causes  of  the  first 
embargo  act,  because  he  had  suppressed  all  notice  of  them 
in  his  first  incendiary  pamphlet,  and  because  I  had  exposed 
the  disingenuity  of  his  artifice  in  that  suppression.  The  fact 
is  as  I  have  publicly  stated;  but  it  is  also  fact,  that  I  should 
have  voted  against  the  first  embargo  act,  had  it  not  been  for 
the  inofficial  account  of  the  Orders  of  Council  which  was 
contained  in  the  National  Intelligencer  of  the  morning  when 
the  message  came,  and  for  the  express  recommendation  from 
the  executive.  General  Smith  was  chairman  of  the  com- 
mittee who  reported  the  act,  and  I  am  persuaded  that  he  will 
recollect  the  discussion  we  had  before  I  agreed  to  the  report, 
in  which  I  expressly  stated  to  him  and  the  committee,  that 
I  did  not  think  the  two  papers  communicated  with  the 
message  were  sufficient  to  justify  the  measure  of  laying  an 
embargo;  but  that  as  the  accounts  in  the  papers  from  Eng- 
land and  the  information  brought  by  Dr.  Bullus  were  of  so 
alarming  a  complexion,  and  as  the  President  had  thought  fit 
to  recommend  the  measure  expressly,  I  presumed  he  must 

Sir,  I  can  attest,  and  now  do  attest,  with  great  pleasure,  the  disinterestedness  and 
purity  of  the  motives  which  dictated  that  gentleman's  (Mr.  Adams)  late  political 
conduct.  As  to  its  wisdom,  that  is  matter  of  opinion,  and  now  in  a  course  of  ex- 
periment; but  as  to  his  exemption  from  all  views  of  personal  aggrandizement,  I 
here  assert  that  fact,  upon  my  own  knowledge  and  my  own  responsibility,  as  far 
as  can  be  warranted  by  the  most  explicit  and  unequivocal  assurances  from  the 
gentleman  himself;  given,  too,  under  circumstances  which  render  their  sincerity 
unquestionable.  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  defend  this  absent  gentleman,  not 
only  on  account  of  his  innocence  of  these  reproaches,  but  on  account  of  his  merits, 
his  virtues,  and  his  talents,  which,  in  my  judgment,  place  him  on  so  high  a  ground 
as  not  to  induce  a  wish,  on  his  part,  to  shrink  from  any  comparison  with  either  of 
the  five  worthies  of  Massachusetts,  of  whom  we  have  been  informed  by  the  gentle- 
man (Mr.  Pickering)."  Annals  of  Congress,  loth  Cong.,  2d  Sess.,  219.  See  also, 
Adams,  Memoirs,  February  2,  1808. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  283 

have  intelligence  which,  without  being  such  as  he  could 
officially  communicate,  was  sufficient  for  deciding  upon  this 
step  as  a  precautionary  measure.  I  said  nearly  the  same 
thing  in  the  Senate  itself  upon  the  debate  there,  which  I 
presume  is  within  the  recollection  of  all  the  members  present 
at  the  time,  who  had  ears  to  hear  any  sound,  but  those  which 
chimed  with  their  own  passions.  Mr.  Bradley  I  am  sure  will 
recollect  it,  for  I  remember  he  immediately  afterwards  told 
me  that  I  had  as  exactly  expressed  his  sentiments  on  the 
subject,  as  if  he  had  spoken  them  himself.1 

Indeed  when  I  first  saw  in  the  newspapers  this  pretence 
raised,  that  the  British  Orders  of  Council  were  not  known  in 
the  United  States  when  the  first  embargo  law  passed,  I 
should  have  been  astonished  at  its  impudence,  could  I  have 
been  astonished  at  anything  in  the  workings  of  party  spirit. 
And  now,  when  I  see  members  of  Congress  laboring  with 
burthens  of  sophistry  to  prove  that  those  orders  were  not 
known,  because  they  were  not  officially  communicated,  I  seek 
in  vain  for  any  line  of  discrimination  between  the  principles 
of  such  men  and  those  of  their  lowest  drudges  in  the  public 
prints. 

The  course  of  policy  which  is  intimated  in  your  letter,  as 
in  your  opinion  the  most  advisable,  corresponds  in  the  main 
with  my  own  sentiments.  The  impossibility  of  carrying  the 
embargo  laws  into  execution,  even  to  the  extent  they  have 
been  hitherto,  becomes  more  certain  from  day  to  day.  Your 
argument  in  the  first  speech,  that  in  our  country  all  the  con- 
stitutional checks  are  upon  deliberation  and  not  upon  the 
execution  of  the  laws,  is  certainly  true,  and  the  distinction  is 
marked  with  an  accuracy  which  has  not  escaped  the  notice  of 
reflecting  men,  even  in  this  quarter.  But  there  may  be 
impediments  to  execution  besides  those  known  to  the  Con- 

1  See  note,  p.  168,  supra. 


284  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

stitution.  Our  district  court  has  been  sitting  six  or  seven 
weeks  here  and  at  Salem,  trying  breaches  of  the  embargo 
laws,  and  I  believe  not  one  case  has  occurred  in  which  the 
jury  have  found  a  verdict  against  the  defendant. 

The  system  of  non-intercourse  and  prohibition  contained 
in  the  second  of  the  three  resolutions  which  have  passed  the 
House  of  Representatives,  will  for  the  present  be  less  un- 
popular than  the  embargo,  if  substituted  in  its  stead.  But  if 
it  should  lead  to  war  with  Great  Britain,  it  will  be  rendered 
equally  odious  in  a  very  short  time.  Indeed,  whatever  the 
federalists  in  Congress  tell  you,  when  pushed  into  a  corner 
about  maintaining  and  defending  the  right  to  navigate  the 
ocean,  you  may  rely  upon  it,  they  mean  practically  to  defend 
it  only  against  France.  Against  Great  Britain  they  will 
defend  and  maintain  NOTHING.  A  thousand  blustering 
speeches  will  never  explain  their  principles  like  their  conduct 
in  the  affair  of  the  Chesapeake.  Mr.  Pickering's  worthies  in 
that  case  openly  maintained  Berkeley's  right  to  search  our 
national  ship  for  deserters,  and  if  the  British  government  had 
not  abandoned  that  pretension  of  their  own  accord,  Pickering 
would  now  be  telling  you  what  the  British  had  to  say  on 
their  side  of  the  question,  and  furnishing  you  with  cases 
and  counter-cases,  and  French  ordinances  and  examples  of 
French  piracies,  to  justify  the  British  doctrine  which,  he 
would  tell  you,  to  negotiate  about,  as  he  does  on  the  subject 
of  impressment  and  of  colonial  trade,  all  which  arguments 
and  authorities  he  would  get  from  the  same  oracle  to  which 
he  went  for  his  ordinance  of  Louis  I4th,  (which  never  had 
any  application  to  colonial  trade,)  in  order  to  countenance 
the  British  rule  of  the  war  of  1756.  I  know  that  oracle  as 
well  as  Mr.  Pickering,  probably  much  better.  I  know  him 
capable  of  furnishing  argument,  authority,  and  precedent 
for  any  degree  of  submission  to  British  LAWS.  But  for  the 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  285 

defence  of  any  right  whatsoever  which  a  British  minister 
shall  contest,  this  nation  must  look  elsewhere. 

I  say  this  to  you,  because  in  opening  to  you  the  principles 
of  these  men,  I  tell  you  the  principles  which  will  govern  the 
conduct  of  this  State.  Our  legislature  is  in  their  hands;  at 
our  next  annual  elections  they  will  have  the  whole  govern- 
ment at  their  disposal.  Far  from  lending  any  aid  to  the 
support  of  national  rights  against  Great  Britain,  they  will 
counteract  as  much  as  they  can  every  measure  to  that  effect, 
whether  in  peace  or  in  war,  and  according  to  every  present 
appearance  they  will  carry  the  State  with  them. 

I  need  not  tell  you  how  opposite  to  their  system  my  senti- 
ments are,  but  the  popular  current  in  this  State  is  entirely 
with  them.  The  sources  of  their  influence  are  numerous  and 
powerful,  and  there  is  but  one  possible  motive  which  can 
deter  them  from  proceeding  to  the  last  extremities,  in  case  of 
a  war  with  England.  That  motive  is  fear. 

They  are  as  selfish  and  as  timid  as  riches  can  make  them, 
and  in  the  hour  of  danger  will  shrink  from  their  own  doc- 
trines, leaving  bolder  and  more  desperate  characters  to  take 
their  places. 

Whatever  course  may  be  finally  adopted  by  the  national 
legislature  will,  I  doubt  not,  find  warm  and  strenuous  sup- 
porters in  this  part  of  the  Union.  But  they  will  in  all  prob- 
ability be  the  minority,  both  in  the  State  and  its  legislature. 
You  may  perhaps  know  better  than  I  do,  the  individual 
characters  of  weight  and  influence,  upon  whose  steadiness 
reliance  can  be  placed.  All  my  personal  and  family  connec- 
tions, and  I  might  almost  say  acquaintance,  in  this  quarter 
are  federalists,  among  whom  those  who  think  as  I  do,  and 
they  are  many,  dare  not  avow  it.  The  wisdom  of  my  late 
conduct,  as  you  justly  observe,  is  in  a  course  of  experiment, 
and  such  is  the  nature  of  the  trial  that  here  I  have  not  a  single 


286  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

friend,  who  is  willing  to  risk  the  chances  with  me  upon  the 
ultimate  issue.  The  friends  of  the  administration  here  have 
heretofore  been  my  political  adversaries,  and  my  intercourse 
with  them  has  naturally  been  not  very  intimate.  There 
are  some  of  them  who,  I  have  no  doubt,  will  adhere  to  their 
principles,  through  good  report  and  through  evil  report,  but 
some  holiday  partisans  will  perhaps  discover  themselves  in 
the  day  of  difficulty.  For  myself  so  deeply  do  I  feel  that  the 
question  of  our  national  independence  is  at  stake,  that  as  an 
individual  citizen,  I  could  ask  of  Heaven  no  higher  blessing 
than  that  of  laying  down  my  life  in  the  cause,  if  I  could 
thereby  contribute  to  its  success. 
I  am,  &c. 

TO  WILLIAM  BRANCH  GILES 

BOSTON,  i6th  January,  1809. 
DEAR  SIR: 

I  duly  received  your  favor  of  the  25th  ultimo,  and  ofler 
you  my  best  thanks  for  your  obliging  attentions  to  Mr. 
Welles  and  Mr.  Sumner,  the  latter  of  whom  is  a  member  of 
our  legislature,  and  in  the  majority. 

I  have,  perhaps,  still  greater  motives  for  concern  with  re- 
gard to  the  probable  proceedings  of  our  legislature  at  their 
approaching  session  than  yourself.  Disapproving  as  I  did 
what  they  have  already  done  in  opposition  to  the  policy  of 
the  nation,  the  steps  which  they  will  probably  take  next  are 
not  likely  to  be  more  suitable  to  my  sentiments.  The  gen- 
eral disposition  of  the  people  here,  I  think,  is  cooler,  than  it 
was  just  before  the  meeting  of  Congress,  and  those,  whose 
object  has  constantly  been  to  stimulate  and  inflame  the  pub- 
lic mind,  are  resorting  to  small  expedients  to  keep  up  the  tone 
of  temper  in  their  followers,  which  is  necessary  for  their  pur- 


i8os]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  287 

poses.  An  attempt  was  made  in  the  legislature  of  New 
Hampshire  to  pass  certain  violent  resolutions,  which  failed 
by  a  large  majority,  many  of  the  federal  members  voting 
against  them.  This  measure  I  have  some  reason  to  suppose 
was  not  brought  forward  without  consultation  with  head- 
quarters. Its  failure  is  a  strong  indication  that  many  of  the 
federalists  begin  to  perceive  the  danger  of  the  ground  to 
which  they  are  thus  drawn,  and  may  possibly  moderate  the 
proceedings  here.  Still  I  have  no  doubt  they  will  be  violent. 

I  have  also  received  your  favor  of  the  5th  instant,  inclosing 
a  Monitor,  with  your  speech  in  Senate  on  the  passage  of  the 
bill  for  enforcing  the  embargo.  It  will  be  printed  here  with 
the  corrections  from  the  paper  itself,  and  I  wish  it  may  con- 
tribute to  reconcile  some  of  our  citizens  to  the  measure. 

I  had  observed  in  the  newspapers  Mr.  Lloyd's  motion  for 
the  production  of  all  the  informal  correspondence  with  Mr. 
Rose,  but  did  not  understand  its  object  until  your  letter 
explained  it.  If  that  motion  should  prevail,  it  might  perhaps 
be  advisable  to  pass  another  resolution  calling  upon  every 
member  of  Congress  to  reduce  to  writing  and  authenticate 
under  the  solemnity  of  his  oath  Mr.  Rose's  informal  corre- 
spondence and  communications  with  him,  and  reciprocally 
his  informal  correspondence  and  communications  with  Mr. 
Rose.  Perhaps  in  that  case  you  might  discover  what  Mr. 
Rose  brought  in  his  hand. 

You  will  have  been  informed  that  two  instances  of  forcible 
violations  of  the  embargo  laws  have  occurred  at  the  two 
extremities  of  our  sea  coast  within  this  Commonwealth. 
The  district  court  after  sitting  seven  or  eight  weeks,  and 
trying  upwards  of  forty  cases,  has  at  length  adjourned.  Not 
one  instance  has  occurred  of  a  conviction  by  jury,  and  finally 
one  of  the  jurymen  is  said  to  have  declared,  that  he  never 
would  agree  to  convict  any  person  under  these  laws,  whatever 


288  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

might  be  the  facts.    The  judge  has  been  firm  and  decided  in 
support  of  the  laws,  as  far  as  his  authority  extended. 

I  expect  to  leave  this  place  for  Washington  the  25th  in- 
stant, to  attend  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  upon 
business  of  a  professional  nature.  While  there  I  shall  pay 
my  respects  to  you  in  person,  and  in  the  meantime  remain 
with  the  highest  esteem  yours.  L 

TO  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS 

WASHINGTON,  5  March,  1809. 

We  have  at  length  got  through  the  argument  on  the  cause 
for  which  I  came  here.  It  was  finished  yesterday  after  having 
taken  up  nearly  four  days.  The  opinion  of  the  Court  will 
probably  be  given  in  the  course  of  the  week  and  my  intention 
is  to  leave  this  place  tomorrow  week,  which  will  be  the  I3th. 
I  depend  therefore  upon  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  again 
at  latest  in  three  weeks  from  this  day. 

The  oath  of  office  was  yesterday  administered  to  the  new 
President  in  the  chamber  of  the  Representatives.  He  de- 
livered a  short  speech,  which  you  will  without  doubt  see  in 
the  newspapers  before  you  can  receive  this  letter.  It  is  in 
very  general  terms,  and  was  spoken  in  a  tone  of  voice  so  low 

1  "Public  affairs  continue  to  be  much  perplexed,  and  the  prospect  is  still  very 
gloomy.  The  House  of  Representatives  have  voted  by  a  large  majority  that  the 
embargo  shall  come  off  the  4th  of  March;  but  having  heretofore  resolved  against 
submission,  they  are  now  to  provide  something  instead  of  the  embargo,  and  what 
that  shall  be  they  cannot  agree  upon. 

"They  talked  of  issuing  letters  of  marque  and  reprisal,  but  they  have  now  de- 
cided against  that.  They  talk  of  authorizing  the  merchants  to  arm  their  vessels, 
but  neither  will  that  succeed.  They  now  talk  of  non-intercourse  with  France  and 
England,  of  excluding  armed  vessels  of  all  nations  from  our  ports,  of  raising  15,000 
men,  of  borrowing  ten  millions  of  dollars.  It  would  be  passing  strange  if  they  should 
finish  by  doing  nothing  at  all."  To  Louisa  Catherine  Adams,  February  8,  1809.  Ms. 


i8o9]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  289 

that  scarcely  any  part  of  it  was  heard  by  three-fourths  of  the 
audience. 

The  body  of  the  House  was  excessively  crowded  and  the 
galleries  were  equally  thronged,  which  gave  it  altogether  a 
very  magnificent  appearance.  The  city  was  very  much 
crowded  with  strangers,  and  I  believe  I  may  say  without 
exaggeration  that  in  the  course  of  the  day  yesterday  I  saw 
more  people  than  in  the  whole  time  I  have  ever  been  here. 

Immediately  after  the  ceremony  was  performed  the  Presi- 
dent and  his  lady  received  company  at  their  own  house.  I 
paid  my  visit  with  your  mamma  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hellen. 
It  was  not  at  the  President's  house,  which  Mr.  Jefferson  has 
not  yet  left.  He  was  with  the  company  who  visited  his  suc- 
cessor. 

In  the  evening  there  was  a  ball  at  Long's  on  the  Capitol 
Hill,  the  house  which  last  winter  was  kept  by  Stelle.  The 
crowd  there  was  excessive;  the  rooms  suffocating  and  the 
entertainment  bad.  Your  sister  Hellen  literally  took  me  with 
her,  for  I  should  not  have  gone  but  at  special  invitation  that 
I  would  attend  her.  The  President  and  his  family  were  also 
there,  and  also  Mr.  Jefferson.  I  had  some  conversation  with 
him  in  the  course  of  the  evening,  in  the  course  of  which  he 
asked  me  whether  I  continued  as  fond  of  POETRY  as  I  was  in 
my  youth.  I  told  him,  yes;  that  I  did  not  perceive  I  had  lost 
any  of  my  relish  for  good  poetry,  though  my  taste  for  the 
minor  poets,  and  particular  for  amatory  verses,  was  not  so 
keen  as  it  had  been  when  I  was  young.  He  said  he  was  still 
fond  of  reading  Homer,  but  did  not  take  much  delight  in 
Virgil. 

Congress  you  know  have  broken  up,  after  repealing  par- 
tially the  embargo  after  the  I5th  of  this  month,  and  totally 
at  the  end  of  the  next  session  of  Congress,  substituting  a 
non-intercourse  with  France  and  England  to  commence  on 


290  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

the  2Oth  of  May.  I  believe  that  nothing  better  upon  the 
whole  could  have  been  done,  though  in  Congress  it  does  not 
suit  the  views  of  either  party.  My  time,  my  reason,  and  my 
feelings,  have  been  so  much  engross'd  by  the  business  which 
brought  me  here  that  I  have  neither  examined  nor  felt  much 
in  relation  to  the  public. 

The  Senate  are  to  continue  in  session  two  or  three  days. 
Principally  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  nominations  of  the 
heads  of  departments.  Report  announces  very  confidently 
who  they  are  to  be,  and  adds  there  has  been  some  perplexity 
in  fixing  upon  them.  It  had  been  determined  that  Mr. 
Gallatin  should  be  Secretary  of  State,  Mr.  R.  Smith  Secre- 
tary of  the  Treasury,  Mr.  Hamilton  of  S.  Carolina  Secretary 
at  War,  and  Dr.  Eustis  Secretary  of  the  Navy.  But  it  is 
understood  that  the  nomination  of  Mr.  Gallatin  to  the 
Department  of  State  would  have  met  with  such  strong  op- 
position in  the  Senate  that  it  was  doubtful  whether  the  ap- 
pointment would  be  confirmed.  The  arrangement  therefore 
now  is  changed,  and  Mr.  R.  Smith  is  to  be  the  Secretary  of 
State,  Mr.  Gallatin  remaining  at  the  head  of  the  Treasury. 
Dr.  Eustis  is  certainly  to  be  Secretary  of  the  Navy.  .  .  . 

I  saw  in  the  newspaper  the  paragraph  to  which  I  suppose 
you  allude,  admonishing  the  aspiring  young  federal  members 
not  to  presume  as  representatives  of  the  people  to  have  any 
opinions  of  their  own.  But  I  should  not  have  suspected 
whence  it  came  nor  whether  it  was  directed  without  the  in- 
timation in  your  letter.  .  .  . 


i8o9]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  291 

TO  LOUISA  CATHERINE  ADAMS 

WASHINGTON,  9  March,  1809. 
•  •••>•• 

I  have  now  finished  as  much  of  my  business  as  I  suppose 
can  be  done  during  the  present  session  of  the  Court.  They 
have,  however,  not  yet  decided  upon  any  of  the  questions 
in  the  causes  for  which  I  was  engaged.  I  shall  not  wait  for 
their  decisions  certainly  longer  than  next  Wednesday,  the 
I5th. 

On  Monday  morning  Mr.  Madison  sent  his  nominations 
to  the  Senate.  The  heads  of  departments  are  as  I  wrote  you 
they  would  be.  He  nominated  me  to  go  to  Russia.1  But  the 
Senate  took  no  vote  on  his  nomination.  They  pass'd  a  resolu- 
tion that  it  was  inexpedient  or  unnecessary  in  their  opinion 
that  a  minister  should  be  sent  to  Russia.  Mr.  Short  had  some 
time  since  been  nominated  by  Mr.  Jefferson  and  the  nomina- 
tion rejected,  as  was  said,  because  the  man  was  disliked.2 

I  believe  you  will  not  be  much  disappointed  at  the  failure 
of  the  proposition  to  go  to  Russia.  In  respect  to  ourselves 
and  to  our  children  it  would  have  been  attended  with  more 
trouble  than  advantage.  I  had  as  little  desire  as  expectation 
of  that  or  any  other  appointment;  and  although  I  feel  myself 
obliged  to  the  President  for  his  nomination,  I  shall  be  better 
pleased  to  stay  at  home  than  I  should  have  been  to  go  to 
Russia. 

1  See  Adams,  Memoirs,  March  6,  1809. 

2  Jefferson  had  appointed  William  Short,  minister  to  Russia,  August  29,  1808,  on 
a  special  and  not  a  permanent  mission.    The  Senate  was  not  in  session,  and  the 
formal  nomination  was  not  laid  before  it  until  February  24,  when  "with  an  unex- 
ampled precipitancy"  rejection  followed,  and  without  explanations,  greatly  to  the 
mortification  of  the  President.    On  entering  office  Madison  nominated  Adams,  but 
the  nomination  was  not  acted  upon.    Jefferson  to  Short,  March  8,  1809,  in  Writings 
of  Jefferson  (Ford),  IX.  249;  Henry  Adams,  History,  IV.  465. 


292  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

The  Senate  finished  their  session  on  Tuesday.  The  mem- 
bers of  both  houses  are  almost  all  gone,  and  the  city  has 
again  the  appearance  of  solitude,  with  the  exception  of  the 
attendants  upon  the  Supreme  Court.  It  forms  a  contrast 
to  the  bustle  and  crowd  of  the  inauguration  day,  when  it  is 
said  there  were  ten  thousand  strangers  here.  This  I  believe, 
however,  is  exaggerated.  .  .  . 

The  embargo  you  know  is  to  come  off  in  part  the  I5th  of 
this  month  notwithstanding  Mr.  Quincy's  predictions.  It  is 
to  be  entirely  repealed  from  the  end  of  the  next  session  of 
Congress.  All  the  federal  members  but  two,  however,  voted 
against  this  bill  for  repealing  the  embargo.  .  .  . 

.'     "  '       "  TO  SKELTON  JONES1 

BOSTON,  17  April,  1809. 
SIR: 

On  my  return  home  a  few  days  since,  after  an  absence  of 
two  months,  I  received  your  circular  letter  dated  in  August 
last,  but  which  had  been  received  at  my  house  only  a  few 
days  before  my  return. 

The  objects  of  inquiry  contained  in  your  letter  are  so  ex- 
tensive, and  at  the  same  time  so  minute,  that  it  would  re- 
quire a  volume  larger  than  that  which  you  propose  to  publish 
to  give  you  satisfactory  answers  relating  to  them.  So  far 
as  your  intention  may  be  confined  to  the  particular  history 
of  Virginia,  the  information  which  it  would  be  in  my  power 
to  furnish  would  indeed  be  extremely  scanty.  But  with  the 

1  Who  had  contracted  with  the  administrators  of  John  Daly  Burke  to  complete 
the  latter's  History  of  Firginia.  The  fourth  volume  was  not  published  until  1816. 
This  autobiographical  sketch  was  printed  in  the  Portfolio,  April,  1819.  It  again 
appeared  in  a  pamphlet  issued  in  1824,  with  the  "Letters  of  Tell,"  originally  printed 
in  the  Baltimore  American. 


i8o9]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  293 

public  affairs  of  the  Union,  of  which  the  State  of  Virginia 
forms  so  great  and  distinguished  a  part,  I  have  been  per- 
sonally conversant  from  the  earliest  period  of  the  war  of  our 
Revolution  to  the  present  day.  Neither  my  leisure  nor 
patience  would  be  sufficient  for  the  memoirs  of  my  own 
times,  which  a  proper  answer  to  the  first  branch  of  your  in- 
quiries would  demand,  and  although  I  should  very  cheerfully 
communicate  anything  within  my  particular  knowledge  and 
which  might  also  be  within  the  general  scope  of  your  sub- 
ject, yet  I  have  no  index  which  can  point  me  specifically  to 
any  anecdote  or  event,  which  would  be  included  within  the 
compass  of  a  moderate  letter,  and  which  would  be  appro- 
priate to  the  work  upon  which  you  are  engaged. 

Of  the  inquiries  relating  personally  to  myself  the  greater 
part  are  such  as  may  be  answered  without  great  difficulty. 
If  "party  prejudice  and  political  animosity'  are,  as  they 
should  be,  banished  from  your  work,  you  will  also  doubtless 
think  it  equally  part  of  your  duty  to  exclude  the  partialities 
of  egotism,  and  to  detect  the  inaccuracies  so  naturally  flow- 
ing from  self-delineation. 

About  the  year  I65O,1  a  man  by  the  name  of  Henry  Adams 
came  from  England  with  seven  sons,  all  of  whom  were  mar- 
ried. The  father  and  one  of  the  sons  settled  in  the  town  of 
Braintree,  about  ten  miles  from  Boston,  in  the  province  of 
Massachusetts  Bay.  The  other  sons,  excepting  one  who  re- 
turned to  England,  fixed  their  abode  in  several  other  parts  of 
the  same  province.  Their  descendants  have  multiplied  in  the 
common  proportion  known  to  the  experience  of  this  country, 
and  the  name  is  one  of  those  most  frequently  met  with  in 
almost  every  part  of  this  commonwealth.  They  were  orig- 

1  Henry  Adams  died  in  1646.  The  genealogy  of  the  family  is  outlined  in  the 
Works  of  John  Adams,  I.  6,  and  more  fully  in  Andrew  N.  Adams,  A  Genealogical  His- 
tory of  Henry  Adams. 


294  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

inally  farmers  and  tradesmen,  and,  until  the  controversies 
with  Great  Britain  and  the  colonies  arose,  scarcely  any  of 
them  had  emerged  from  the  obscurity  in  which  those  stations 
were  held.  Few  of  them  before  that  time  had  possessed  the 
advantages  of  education.  The  father  of  the  late  Governor 
of  Massachusetts,  Samuel  Adams,  was,  I  believe,  the  first 
of  the  name  distinguished  in  any  public  character.  He  was 
a  merchant  of  Boston,  and  for  some  time  a  representative 
of  that  town  in  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Province. 

Samuel  Adams  and  my  father  John  Adams  were  both 
descended  from  the  first  Henry,  but  by  two  of  the  sons. 
They  were  therefore  remotely  connected  in  blood;  but  there 
is  a  very  early  incident  in  the  life  of  each  of  them,  which 
seems  to  indicate  that  the  Spirit  of  Independence,  which  is  so 
strongly  marked  in  the  history  of  the  New  England  colonies 
from  their  first  settlement,  had  been  largely  shared  by  the 
family  from  which  they  came,  and  instilled  with  all  its  ef- 
ficacy into  their  minds. 

They  were  both  educated  at  Harvard  College,  an  institu- 
tion founded  in  1638,  and  thus  coeval  with  the  first  settle- 
ment of  the  Massachusetts  colony.  It  is  the  seminary  from 
which  almost  every  man  of  any  eminence  in  our  history  has 
issued,  until  the  establishment  so  much  more  recent  of  the 
other  New  England  colleges. 

Samuel  Adams  was  many  years  older  than  my  father.  He 
received  his  degree  of  Master  of  Arts  at  Harvard  College  in 
1743.  It  was  then  the  custom  of  that  college,  that  the  can- 
didates for  this  degree  should  each  of  them  propose  a  ques- 
tion having  relation  to  any  of  the  sciences,  in  which  they  had 
been  instructed,  and  assuming  the  affirmative  or  negative 
side  of  the  proposition,  profess  to  be  prepared  to  defend  the 
principle  contained  in  it  at  the  public  Commencement 
against  all  opponents. 


i8o9]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  295 

The  question  proposed  by  Samuel  Adams  was,  "whether 
the  people  have  a  just  right  of  resistance,  when  oppressed  by 
their  rulers,"  and  the  side  that  he  asserted  was  the  affirma- 
tive. 

My  father  took  his  degree  of  Bachelor  of  Arts  in  1755,  and 
that  of  master,  1758.  There  has  been  lately  published  in  the 
Monthly  Anthology  a  letter  written  by  him  in  the  year  1755, 
and  in  the  twentieth  year  of  his  age.1  Written  to  one  of  his 
youthful  companions,  and  in  which  the  probability  of  the 
severance  of  the  colonies  from  the  mother-country,  the 
causes  from  which  that  event  would  naturally  proceed,  and 
the  policy  by  which  Britain  might  prevent  it,  are  all  in- 
dicated with  the  precision  of  prophecy.  The  date  of  this 
letter,  the  age  at  which  it  was  written,  and  the  standing  in 
society  of  the  writer  at  the  time,  are  circumstances  which 
render  it  remarkable.  No  copy  of  it  was  kept,  but  its  con- 
tents appear  to  have  made  a  strong  impression  upon  the 
person  to  whom  it  was  written.  He  carefully  preserved  it 
and,  dying  many  years  afterwards,  left  it  to  his  son.  In  his 
hands  it  remained  until  about  two  years  ago,  when,  after  the 
lapse  of  more  than  half  a  century,  he  sent  it  as  a  curious  docu- 
ment back  to  the  writer  himself. 

These  anecdotes  are  perhaps  as  much  within  other  sub- 
jects of  your  inquiries,  as  within  that  relative  to  my  parent- 
age. They  may  furnish  occasion  for  reflections  to  a  philo- 
sophical historian  more  interesting  than  any  I  could  draw 
from  the  most  conspicuous  incident  of  my  own  life. 

My  mother's  name  was  Smith.  She  too  is  of  English 
extraction,  but  her  parents  for  three  preceding  generations 
have  been  natives  of  this  country.  Her  father  and  grand- 
father were  clergymen.  Her  mother  was  a  daughter  of  John 
Quincy,  who  was  many  years  a  member  of  the  provincial 

1  To  Nathan  Webb,  October  12, 1755.    It  is  printed  in  Works  of  John  Adams,  1. 23. 


296  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

Legislature,  several  times  Speaker  of  the  House,  and  after- 
wards member  of  the  council.  His  name  is  mentioned  in 
Hutchinson's  History  of  Massachusetts  Bay. 

I  was  born  at  Braintree,  in  that  part  of  the  town  that  is 
now  incorporated  by  the  name  of  Quincy.  The  day  of  my 
birth  was  Saturday,  II  July,  1767.  The  next  day  I  was 
christened  by  the  name  of  my  great  grandfather,  who  at  the 
very  moment,  when  I  received  my  name,  was  resigning  his 
own  spirit  into  the  hands  of  his  Maker. 

In  the  eleventh  year  of  my  age  my  father  took  me  with 
him  to  France,  where  he  was  sent  as  a  joint  Commissioner 
with  Benjamin  Franklin,  and  Arthur  Lee,  at  the  Court  of 
Versailles.  We  sailed  from  Boston  in  February,  1778,  and 
arrived  at  Bordeaux  in  the  beginning  of  April  of  the  same 
year.  Before  that  time  my  education  had  been  that  of  the 
common  schools,  interrupted  by  the  convulsions  of  the 
times,  but  supplied  by  the  substituted  care  and  attention  of 
both  my  parents.  My  obligations  to  them  in  this  respect 
are  such  as  gratitude  can  never  repay  to  them.  The  impres- 
sion resulting  from  it  upon  my  own  mind  has  been,  that  of 
a  special  duty  incumbent  upon  me  to  pay  the  debt  of  the 
former  age  to  that  which  is  to  succeed,  and  to  reward  my 
parents  by  transferring  the  same  obligations  to  my  children. 

After  residing  about  eighteen  months  in  France,  where  I 
was  successively  placed  at  two  different  schools,  where  I 
learned  the  language  of  the  country  and  a  little  Latin,  I  re- 
turned home  with  my  father.  Instead  of  three  Commis- 
sioners Congress  found  it  more  expedient  to  keep  at  the 
French  Court  a  single  minister.  Dr.  Franklin  was  appointed 
to  that  office,  Mr.  Lee  had  a  separate  commission  for  Spain, 
and  my  father  received  permission  to  come  home.  We  came 
in  the  French  frigate  La  Sensible,  in  company  with  the 
Chevalier  de  la  Luzerne,  who  succeeded  M.  Gerard  as  the 


i8o9]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  297 

minister  of  France  to  the  United  States.  We  arrived  at  Bos- 
ton I  August,  1779.  The  Massachusetts  Convention  for 
forming  a  constitution  was  then  just  about  to  assemble.  My 
father  was  elected  a  member  of  that  body,  and  drew  the 
original  plan  of  the  constitution  which,  with  some  modifica- 
tions made  by  the  Convention,  was  afterwards  adopted, 
and  is  still  the  constitution  of  this  Commonwealth. 

In  November  of  the  same  year,  1779,  my  father  was  again 
sent  to  Europe,  with  a  commission  for  negotiating  peace 
and  a  treaty  of  commerce  with  Great  Britain,  whenever 
that  power  should  be  disposed  to  terminate  the  war.  He 
took  me  with  him  again,  together  with  my  younger  brother 
Charles,  who  is  since  dead.  We  embarked  at  Boston  in  the 
same  frigate,  La  Sensible,  then  upon  her  return  to  France. 
She  was  bound  to  Brest;  but  a  few  days  after  we  sailed  in  a 
gale  of  wind  she  sprung  a  leak,  which  in  the  course  of  a  very 
short  passage  became  so  large,  that  she  was  obliged  to  make 
the  first  land  she  could  reach  in  Europe  and  entered  the  port 
of  Ferrol  in  Spain.  She  was  unable  without  a  thorough  re- 
pair to  accomplish  the  remainder  of  her  voyage;  we  therefore 
disembarked,  and  travelled  by  land  from  Ferrol  to  Paris, 
where  we  arrived  in  January,  1780.  I  was  here  put  again  to 
school;  but  in  July  of  the  same  year  my  father  went  to  Hol- 
land, and  took  us  with  him  there.  We  were  placed  first  at 
the  public  city  school  at  Amsterdam,  and  afterwards  at  the 
University  of  Leyden.  In  July,  1781,  Mr.  Francis  Dana, 
who  had  accompanied  my  father  to  Europe  as  secretary  to 
the  legation  for  negotiating  peace,  received  a  commission 
from  Congress  as  Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the  Empress 
of  Russia,  and  I  went  with  him  as  his  private  secretary.  I 
was  with  him  fourteen  months  at  St.  Petersburg,  and  in 
October,  1782,  left  him  to  return  through  Sweden,  Denmark, 
Hamburg,  and  Bremen  to  Holland,  where  my  father  had 


298  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

shortly  before  been  received  as  Minister  Plenipotentiary 
from  the  United  States,  and  had  concluded  the  commercial 
treaty  with  the  Republic  of  the  United  Netherlands.  Upon 
this  journey  I  employed  the  whole  winter,  passing  several 
weeks  at  Stockholm,  at  Copenhagen,  and  at  Hamburg.  I 
reached  The  Hague  in  April,  1783;  but  my  father  was  then 
at  Paris  engaged  in  the  negotiations  for  peace.  From  April 
until  July,  I  remained  at  The  Hague  residing  with,  and  re- 
ceiving instructions  from,  C.  W.  F.  Dumas,  a  native  of 
Switzerland,  a  man  of  letters,  who  had  been  a  zealous  friend 
of  the  American  cause,  and  then  held  an  office  as  agent  for 
the  United  States.  In  July,  an  interval  of  suspension  oc- 
curred to  the  negotiations,  during  which  my  father  was  called 
for  a  short  time  to  Amsterdam.  On  his  return  to  Paris  he 
took  me  with  him.  The  definitive  treaty  of  Peace  was  signed 
3  September,  1783,  from  which  time  till  May,  1785,  I  was 
chiefly  with  my  father  in  England,  Holland,  and  France. 

I  was  now  nearly  eighteen  years  of  age,  and  my  education, 
as  the  above  detail  of  my  wanderings  about  the  world  will 
show,  had  been  rather  desultory  than  regularly  systematic, 
rather  calculated  to  make  me  acquainted  with  men  than 
books.  Hence  it  has  happened  that,  though  I  was  always 
of  a  studious  turn  and  addicted  to  books  beyond  its  bounds 
of  moderation,  yet  my  acquirements  in  literature  and  science 
have  been  all  superficial,  and  I  never  attained  a  profound 
knowledge  of  anything.  At  the  period  of  which  I  am  now 
speaking,  I  became  sensible  of  other  inconveniencies,  that 
might  arise  from  longer  continuance  in  such  an  unsettled 
course.  By  remaining  much  longer  in  Europe  I  saw  the 
danger  of  an  alienation  from  my  own  country,  which  would 
disqualify  me  for  contentment  with  my  condition  in  after 
times,  and  I  found  myself  contracting  sentiments,  manners, 
and  opinions  of  European  growth,  which  I  knew  could  not 


i8o9]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  299 

suit  the  regions,  where  I  expected  to  pass  my  days,  and  for 
which  I  had  retained  the  warmest  affection.  My  father  was 
appointed  Minister  to  the  Court  of  St.  James,  but  instead 
of  going  with  him  I  requested  him  to  let  me  return  to  my 
native  country,  and  finish  my  education  among  my  own 
people.  This  inclination  exactly  concurred  with  his  own 
wishes.  I  returned  to  America,  and  after  six  months  of 
studies  with  a  private  instructor  to  acquire  sufficient  knowl- 
edge of  the  Greek  language,  (which  until  then  I  had  entirely 
neglected,)  for  admission  to  the  university  at  Cambridge,  I 
entered  there  in  a  class  advanced  almost  to  the  end  of  the 
third  year  of  the  collegiate  course,  and,  finishing  with  them 
the  usual  term  of  study,  took  the  degree  of  Bachelor  of  Arts 
in  July,  1787.  I  then  immediately  entered  as  a  student  at 
law  in  the  office  of  Theophilus  Parsons,  who  then  resided 
at  Newbury  Port,  and  was  one  of  the  most  eminent  lawyers 
in  this  country.  He  is  now  Chief  Justice  of  the  Supreme 
Judicial  Court  of  the  Commonwealth.  After  three  years  of 
attendance,  I  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  the  courts  of  the 
State,  and  fixed  my  residence  in  the  capital. 

I  resided  in  Boston  about  four  years.  My  professional 
practice  was  inconsiderable,  my  attendance  at  my  office  was 
unremitted,  and  having  little  business  to  occupy  my  time 
I  employed  much  of  it  in  speculations  upon  political  subjects 
in  the  newspapers.  In  the  summer  of  1791,  I  published  a 
series  of  papers  in  the  Boston  Centinel  under  the  signature 
of  Publicola,  containing  remarks  upon  the  first  part  of 
Paine's  Rights  of  Man.  These  papers  were  for  some  time 
attributed  to  my  father,  and  for  that  reason  excited  much 
public  notice  both  in  this  country  and  in  Europe.  They 
were  at  first  very  unpopular  here,  as  containing  political 
heresy  and  questioning  the  infallibility  of  the  French  Revolu- 
tion. But  having  been  republished  in  England,  and  received 


300  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

with  some  public  commendation  there,  they  afterwards  rose 
much  in  the  estimation  of  that  class  of  literary  characters 
among  us,  (and  it  is  a  numerous  tribe,)  who  import  their 
opinions  twice  a  year  from  London  and  Liverpool,  with  the 
other  articles  of  British  manufacture. 

In  April,  1793,  on  the  first  information  that  war  between 
Great  Britain  and  France  had  been  declared,  I  published  in 
the  Centinel  three  papers  under  the  signature  of  Marcellus, 
the  object  of  which  was  to  prove,  that  the  duty  and  the  in- 
terest of  the  United  States  required  that  they  should  remain 
neutral  to  that  war.  These  papers  were  published  before  Pres- 
ident Washington's  proclamation  of  neutrality,  and  when 
I  had  no  knowledge  that  such  a  proclamation  was  contem- 
plated. There  are  two  political  principles  that  form  the  basis 
of  the  system  of  policy  best  suited  to  the  interests  and  the 
duties  of  this  country.  One  in  relation  to  its  internal  con- 
cerns, UNION,  the  other  in  respect  to  its  intercourse  with 
foreign  nations,  INDEPENDENCE.  These  principles  are 
the  keys  to  my  political  creed.  I  believed  that  both  the 
union  and  the  independence  of  the  nation  depended  much 
upon  the  establishment  of  the  system  of  our  neutrality  to 
the  wars  of  Europe;  I  thought  that  was  the  critical  moment 
for  the  establishment  of  this  system,  and  there  were  symp- 
toms of  a  tendency  in  the  public  opinion,  which  might  have 
involved  us  immediately  in  the  war,  as  allies  of  France. 
These  were  the  motives  that  dictated  the  publication  of  the 
papers  signed  Marcellus,  which  were  not  much  noticed  at 
the  time,  and  which  have  long  since  been  forgotten. 

In  the  winter  of  1793  and  1794  I  published  another  series 
of  papers  in  support  of  President  Washington's  administra- 
tion, in  the  controversies  excited  by  the  French  minister 
Genet.  It  was  my  zeal  for  the  independence  of  the  nation 
that  again  impelled  me  to  write,  and  on  this  occasion  my 


i8o9l  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  301 

sentiments  happened  to  accord  so  well  with  the  prevailing 
public  opinion,  that  these  papers  were  received  with  much 
favor,  and  contributed  to  give  me  reputation. 

In  May,  1794,  I  was  appointed  Minister  Resident  to  the 
United  Netherlands.  The  circumstances  that  led  to  this 
appointment  were  never  known  to  me.  The  nomination 
was,  of  course,  made  by  President  Washington.  I  have  heard 
that  my  name  had  been  mentioned  to  him  by  Mr.  Jefferson, 
before  his  retirement  from  the  Department  of  State,  who 
had  some  personal  acquaintance  with  me  while  I  was  in 
France;  I  have  also  been  told  that  the  papers  I  have  just 
mentioned  had  attracted  the  President's  attention,  and  led 
him  to  make  inquiries  concerning  their  author.  My  father 
was  then  Vice  President,  but  my  appointment  was  as  unex- 
pected to  him  as  to  myself. 

From  1794  to  1801  I  was  in  Europe,  successively  employed 
as  a  public  minister  in  Holland,  England  and  Prussia.  One 
of  the  last  acts  of  President  Washington's  administration 
was  the  nomination  of  me  as  Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the 
Court  of  Portugal.  But  while  on  my  way  from  The  Hague 
to  Lisbon,  I  received  a  new  commission  which  changed  my 
destination  to  Berlin.  The  nomination  of  me  to  this  mission 
was  made  by  my  father,  and  has  been  represented  as  an 
office  bestowed  upon  me  by  him.  It  was  even  asserted  in  the 
public  newspapers  that  I  had  received  the  separate  outfit  of 
these  different  appointments.  The  truth  was,  that  on  my 
first  appointment  in  1794,  I  received  the  outfit  of  a  minister 
resident  only  4500  dollars,  that  on  my  subsequent  appoint- 
ment as  Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  Lisbon  I  received  not 
the  full  outfit  of  a  Minister  of  that  rank,  but  so  much  as  with 
the  4500  dollars  received  in  1794  amounted  to  that  outfit, 
that  is  to  say  4500  dollars  more,  making  in  the  whole  9000, 
the  outfit  that  has  always  been  allowed  to  every  Minister 


302  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

Plenipotentiary  from  the  first  appointment  of  ministers 
under  our  present  Constitution.  In  this  respect  my  case,  I 
believe,  has  been  peculiar.  There  have,  at  least,  been  in- 
stances of  a  full  outfit  allowed  on  a  new  appointment  given 
to  a  person  already  abroad.  And  this  circumstance  may  have 
given  rise  to  the  misrepresentation  of  the  fact,  as  respected 
me.  The  appointment,  which  I  held  under  the  nomination 
of  my  father,  subjected  me  to  additional  expenses,  but  never 
gave  me  the  addition  of  a  dollar  from  the  public  treasury 
to  that  which  I  should  have  been  entitled  to  under  the  ap- 
pointment to  Lisbon. 

I  resided  at  Berlin  from  November,  1797,  until  April,  1801, 
and  during  that  time  concluded  a  treaty  of  commerce  with 
Prussia,  which  had  been  the  principal  object  of  this  mission. 
I  was  then  recalled,  just  before  the  commencement  of  Mr. 
Jefferson's  administration.  I  arrived  at  Philadelphia  in 
September,  1801. 

In  1802,  I  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Senate  of  Massa- 
chusetts, and  served  in  that  capacity  one  year.  I  was  then 
elected  by  the  legislature  of  the  same  State  a  Senator  of  the 
United  States  for  six  years,  from  the  4th  of  March,  1803. 
In  June,  1808, 1  resigned  that  office,  and  since  that  time  have 
been  in  no  public  station.  On  the  6th  of  March  last  I  was 
nominated  by  Mr.  Madison  for  a  mission  to  Russia,  but  a 
majority  of  the  Senate  being  of  opinion  that  such  a  mission 
was  inexpedient  and  unnecessary,  no  vote  was  taken  on  the 
nomination. 

The  part  which  I  have  acted  while  in  public  life  has  been 
naturally  diversified  in  the  detail  by  the  different  offices  in 
which  I  have  been  placed.  When  abroad  my  situation  was 
ministerial,  my  general  duty  was  marked  out  by  my  instruc- 
tions, and  they  were  pursued  to  the  satisfaction  of  the 
executive  authority  by  which  I  was  employed.  As  a  member 


i8o9]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  303 

of  the  State  legislature,  I  made  myself  obnoxious  to  a  great 
and  powerful  combination  of  banking  interests  by  a  strong 
but  ineffectual  opposition  to  a  bank-making  speculation,  of 
which  the  time  is  not  yet  come  to  tell  the  whole  truth. 

In  the  Senate  of  the  United  States,  the  part  which  I  acted 
was  that  of  an  independent  member.  My  fundamental  prin- 
ciples, as  I  have  told  you,  were  Union  and  Independence.  I 
was  sworn  to  support  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States, 
and  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  support  the  existing  adminis- 
tration in  every  measure  that  my  impartial  judgment  could 
approve.  I  discharged  my  duty  to  my  country,  but  I  com- 
mitted the  unpardonable  sin  against  Party.  The  legislature 
of  Massachusetts  by  a  small  majority  of  federal  votes  in 
May,  1808,  elected  another  person  to  represent  them  from 
the  expiration  of  my  term  of  service,  and  I  immediately 
resigned  the  remainder  of  that  term.  They  had  passed 
resolutions  in  the  nature  of  instructions  to  their  Senators, 
which  I  disapproved.  I  chose  neither  to  act  in  conformity 
with  those  resolutions,  nor  to  represent  constituents,  who 
had  no  confidence  in  me.  It  was  not  without  a  painful 
sacrifice  of  feeling  that  I  withdrew  from  the  public  service 
at  a  moment  of  difficulty  and  danger,  but  when  the  con- 
stituted organs  of  that  country,  under  whom  I  held  my  sta- 
tion, had  discarded  me  for  the  future,  and  required  me  to 
aid  them  in  promoting  measures  tending  to  dissolve  the 
Union,  and  to  sacrifice  the  independence  of  the  nation,  I  was 
no  representative  for  them.  These  were  the  immediate 
causes  of  my  retirement  from  public  life. 

I  have  already  remarked,  that  from  the  unsettled  and 
desultory  manner  in  which  my  years  of  infancy  were  em- 
ployed, I  never  attained  a  profound  knowledge  of  any  of  the 
sciences.  I  had  always  however  an  eager  relish  for  the  pur- 
suits of  literature,  and  acquired  at  an  early  period  of  life  a 


304  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

taste  for  the  fine  arts.  In  the  capitals  of  the  great  European 
nations  the  monuments  of  architecture  and  of  sculpture 
continually  meet  the  eye,  and  cannot  escape  the  attention 
even  of  the  most  careless  observer.  Painting,  music,  the 
decorations  of  the  drama,  and  the  elegant  arts  which  are 
combined  in  its  representations,  have  a  charm  to  the  senses 
and  imagination  of  youth,  vivid  in  proportion  to  the  perfec- 
tion which  they  naturally  attain  in  those  large  cities,  where 
immense  multitudes  of  men  are  compressed  within  so  small 
an  extent  of  space.  The  exhibitions  of  excellence  in  all  these 
faculties,  which  I  had  frequent  opportunities  of  witnessing, 
at  the  time  of  life  when  they  were  calculated  to  make  the 
strongest  impression,  gave  me  a  taste  for  them,  which  has 
contributed  to  much  of  the  enjoyment  of  my  life. 

In  the  year  1806  a  professorship  of  Rhetoric  and  Oratory 
was  instituted  at  Harvard  University,  founded  upwards  of 
thirty  years  since  by  Nicholas  Boylston,  formerly  a  merchant 
of  Boston.  I  was  appointed  the  first  professor  on  this  founda- 
tion, and  have  delivered  a  course  of  lectures  on  the  subjects 
of  the  institution,  which  has  been  very  recently  completed.1 
The  duties  of  this  office,  together  with  the  practice  of  law 
which  since  my  retirement  from  the  public  service  I  have 
resumed,  form  at  present  the  employments  of  my  life. 

I  was  married  at  London  in  July,  1797,  to  Louisa  Catherine 
Johnson,  second  daughter  of  Joshua  Johnson,  then  Consul 
of  the  United  States  at  that  place.  He  was  a  native  of  Mary- 
land, and  a  brother  of  Thomas  Johnson,  sometime  governor 
of  that  State,  and  a  distinguished  patriot  of  the  revolution. 
I  have  three  children,  all  sons:  George  Washington,  born  at 
Berlin,  12  April,  1801;  John,  born  at  Boston,  4  July,  1803; 
and  Charles  Francis,  born  at  Boston,  18  August,  1807. 

You  have  now,  sir,  answers  to  most  of  the  questions  re- 

1  In  the  Portfolio  a  paragraph  was  added  at  this  point  on  the  Letters  from  Silesia. 


i8o9]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  305 

lating  personally  to  myself,  contained  in  your  letter.  It 
would  have  given  me  pleasure  to  have  supplied  you  with  more 
valuable  materials  for  your  projected  work.  I  know  not 
any  person  to  whom  I  could  refer  you  for  information  con- 
cerning me,  which  I  myself  should  scruple  to  give.  I  have 
friends  who  would  doubtless  draw  a  flattering  likeness  of  my 
character,  and  enemies  who  would  perhaps  be  ready  enough 
to  show  me  in  caricature.  Certainly  neither  of  them  would 
know  so  much  of  me  as  I  do,  and  I  doubt  whether  either 
would  form  a  more  impartial  estimate  of  my  qualities  good 
or  bad.  If  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth,  were 
told  of  me,  the  tissue  of  the  story  would  be  (to  use  an  ex- 
pression of  Shakespeare)  a  mingled  yarn.  There  would  be 
found  in  the  narrative  something  to  commend,  and  enough  to 
censure.  As  far  as  I  know  myself,  the  motives  of  my  public 
conduct  have  always  been  pure  and  disinterested.  Perhaps 
I  have  too  much  indulged  the  suggestions  of  my  own  judg- 
ment, and  paid  too  little  deference  to  that  of  other  men. 
The  agency  of  party  is  so  organized  in  our  country,  that  the 
undertaking  to  pursue  a  course  altogether  independent  of  it 
as  a  public  man  is  perhaps  impracticable.  However  this 
may  be,  I  do  not  regret  having  made  the  attempt,  and 
whether  in  public  or  in  private  life  it  is  my  unalterable  de- 
termination to  abide  by  the  principles  which  have  always 
been  my  guides.  I  am,  etc. 

REVIEW  OF  THE  "WORKS  OF  FISHER  AMES" 

PREFACE  1 

The  following  papers  were  originally  published  in  the  Boston 
Patriot,  under  the  title  of  "Review  of  Works  of  Fisher  Ames,  com- 

1  In  January,  1809,  appeared  a  volume,  Works  of  Fisher  Ames.    Compiled  by  a 
Number  of  his  Friends.    Prefixed  to  it  Vas  a  sketch  of  Ames'  life  and  character  by 


3o6  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

piled  by  a  number  of  his  friends."  This  review  was  meant  to  be 
rather  political  than  literary.  Of  the  style  and  composition  of  his 
writings  little  is  said  —  it  was  deemed  unnecessary  to  divert  the 
attention  of  the  reader  from  a  discussion  of  the  most  important 
principles,  to  the  mere  structure  of  discourse  and  verbal  criti- 
cism —  and,  in  regard  to  the  style,  it  was  unnecessary  to  enlarge: 
Mr.  Ames's  biographer  having  characterized  it  with  the  amplifying 
and  extenuating  hand  of  friendship,  but  with  the  discernment  and 
elegance  of  genuine  taste.  But  the  moral  and  political  doctrines, 
which  were  attempted  to  be  ushered  into  circulation  under  the 
sanction  of  his  amiable  character  and  respected  talents,  were  too 
portentous  to  be  passed  over  without  animadversion. 

The  death  of  Mr.  Ames  happened  at  a  very  momentous  period 
of  our  national  history.  At  a  time  when  rights  unquestionable  at 
the  tribunal  of  justice,  and  essential  to  the  independence  of  our 
country,  were  attacked  by  all  the  power  and  all  the  artifice  of  the 
greatest  naval  empire  upon  the  globe.  When  in  defence  of  those 
rights  the  government  of  the  Union  had  resorted  to  the  only  pos- 
sible remedy  short  of  war;  and  when  a  formidable  party  in  the 
heart  of  the  country,  had  taken  their  side  in  this  great  controversy 
with  the  foreign  aggressor,  and  against  their  own  government.  So 
obviously  was  the  justice  of  this  cause  on  OUR  SIDE,  that  although 
every  measure  adopted  by  this  party,  was  a  measure  of  encourage- 
ment to  the  adversary  and  of  annoyance  to  our  own  defenders,  yet 
no  living  man  had  yet  dared  to  pledge  his  stake  in  society  to  the 
direct  and  unqualified  vindication  of  the  British  pretensions. 

John  Thornton  Kirkland,  though  not  signed  in  the  publication.  The  use  of  the 
material  in  the  preparation  of  this  volume  indicated  a  political  bias,  the  more  no- 
ticeable because  of  the  course  of  public  events  since  1801.  In  the  Boston  Patriot, 
a  journal  of  recent  birth,  Adams  began  a  series  of  comments  upon  the  Works.  The 
first  article  appeared  April  29,  1809,  and  continued  in  the  issues  of  May  24,  27, 
June  3,  7,  and  10.  They  were  afterwards  printed  as  a  pamphlet:  American  Prin- 
ciples. A  Review  of  Works  of  Fisher  Ames.  Only  the  preface,  prepared  for  the 
pamphlet  and  explaining  the  purpose  of  the  writer,  is  reprinted  in  these  volumes. 
The  "Review,"  as  the  author  says  in  his  Diary,  attracted  but  little  notice;  but  it 
called  out  a  reply  from  John  Lowell,  Remarks  on  the  Hon.  John  Q.  Adams's  Review 
of  Mr.  Ames's  Works,  with  some  Strictures  on  the  Views  of  the  Author.  Boston,  1809. 


i8o9l  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  307 

Indirectly  they  were  indeed  justified;  and  while  Britain  was  heap- 
ing insolence  upon  injury  in  her  treatment  of  this  country,  she 
was  supported  by  these  Americans  as  the  exalted  champion  of 
liberty,  the  defender  of  oppressed  nations,  the  last  hope  of  the 
human  race.1  But  even  the  addressers  and  reporters  of  the  last 
Massachusetts  Legislature,  (anxious  as  they  were  to  foment  the 
spirit  of  subserviency  to  Britain,  urgent  as  they  were  to  unfurl 
the  republican  banners  against  the  imperial  standard,  intrepid  as 
they  were  to  threaten  and  organize  internal  war,  in  aid  of  the 
external  enemy,  against  our  own  government,  struggling  in  de- 
fence of  OUR  OWN  CAUSE;  even  they)  shrank  from  the  formal  jus- 
tification of  the  British  Orders  of  Council. 

But  what  no  living  man  could  be  persuaded  to  do,  the  friends  of 
Mr.  Ames  made  him  perform  after  his  death.  During  his  life-time 
he  had  never  chosen  to  pledge  his  name  to  those  doctrines;  and 
though  he  had  given  them  too  much  countenance  in  nameless 
newspaper  paragraphs  and  essays,  he  had  manifested  a  steady 
unwillingness  to  avow  them  in  the  face  of  day.  But  scarcely  was 
he  cold  in  his  grave,  when  his  name  was  doomed  by  his  friends 
to  stand  before  the  public,  responsible  for  the  assertion,  that  on 
the  most  momentous  questions  at  issue  between  Britain  and  us, 
she  was  right  and  we  were  wrong.  Nor  was  this  the  only  fatal 
error,  promulgated  in  the  posthumous  part  of  this  volume.  The 
unreasonable  veneration  of  everything  connected  with  Britain, 
the  excessive  abhorrence  of  everything  connected  with  France, 
and  the  mixture  of  scorn  and  contempt  for  his  own  country,  which 
in  his  last  days  were  at  the  basis  of  all  his  political  opinions,  were 

1  An  American  JUDGE  [Parsons]  had  even  talked  of  the  impressment  of  British 
subjects  from  American  merchant  vessels,  as  being  agreeable  to  a  RIGHT  claimed 
and  exercised  for  ages,  and  had  undertaken  to  justify  the  British  King's  proclama- 
tion of  October  16,  1807,  under  the  pretence  that  it  was  merely  an  assertion  of  the 
nation's  RIGHT  to  the  service  of  its  subjects  in  time  of  war.  The  orders  in  council 
too,  had  been  defended,  as  merely  retaliatory  upon  France,  and  although  some 
straining  had  been  manifested  at  the  name  of  tribute,  yet  it  was  found  that  the  same 
thing  might  be  swallowed  with  perfect  ease  under  the  name  of  a  transit  duty. — Note 
by  Adams. 


308  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

principles  from  which  the  most  mischievous  deductions  naturally 
flowed.  The  aversion  to  Republics  and  Republican  institutions, 
the  bitter  invective  against  our  popular  elections,  the  humiliating 
dogma  that  our  liberties  depended  upon  nothing  but  the  British 
navy;  the  terror,  that  his  children  would  be  taken  for  Bonaparte's 
conscription  to  St.  Domingo,  were  calculated  as  far  as  they  could 
operate  to  spread  a  contagion  of  false  opinions  upon  objects  of  the 
highest  moment  to  the  people  of  this  country.  And  the  danger  of 
these  false  opinions  was  aggravated  in  proportion  to  the  reverence 
for  the  talents  and  the  respect  for  the  personal  character  of  the 
author,  so  general  throughout  the  community.  The  natural  and 
indissoluble  connection  between  these  opinions,  and  the  public 
measures  of  those  who  dare  not  avow  them,  was  material  to  be 
shewn;  and  the  rancorous  prejudices  against  our  fellow  citizens 
in  other  parts  of  the  Union,  the  contracted  basis  of  exclusive  love, 
upon  which  political  attachment  was  asserted  to  rest,  the  crude  and 
undigested  notions  of  patriotism,  with  the  long  argument  to  prove 
that  it  cannot  exist  in  this  country,  nor  in  any  Republic,  were  so 
many  potions  of  poison  for  the  public  mind,  which  the  writer  of 
these  papers  sincerely  thinks,  loudly  called  for  an  antidote,  before 
they  should  have  time  to  circulate  with  all  their  venom,  in  the 
veins  and  arteries  of  the  body  politic. 

To  defend  the  insulted  reputation  of  our  country,  to  vindicate 
from  false  aspersions  the  character  of  the  nation,  and  its  Re- 
publican institutions,  to  refute  the  groundless  charges  against  our 
children  and  our  brethren  of  the  Western  and  Southern  States, 
to  assert  the  real  foundation  upon  which  our  independence  must 
stand,  to  maintain  its  RIGHTS  against  the  ruffian  principles  of  the 
British  cabinet,  and  to  guard  the  sense  and  spirit  of  the  people 
against  the  mistakes  of  fancy  usurping  upon  the  province  of  judg- 
ment, in  the  estimates  of  political  morality  —  such  were  the  mo- 
tives which  dictated  these  papers. 

To  hold  up  to  public  view  the  errors  of  an  ingenious  and  amiable 
man,  so  recently  deceased,  was  a  task,  painful  to  the  feelings  of 
the  writer,  and  which  nothing  but  the  importance  of  the  errors, 


1809]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  309 

and  the  danger  of  the  impressions  they  were  producing  upon  the 
public  mind,  could  justify.  The  most  exceptionable  principles, 
and  the  most  important  mistakes  in  point  of  fact,  are  quoted  word 
for  word  from  the  volume  itself.  In  no  one  instance  however  has 
a  quotation  been  made,  which  in  its  connection  with  the  other 
parts  of  the  discourse  would  bear  a  different  aspect,  from  that 
which  it  bears  in  the  selection.  For  these  wanderings  of  intellect, 
it  is  abundantly  manifest  upon  the  face  of  the  volume,  that 
Mr.  Ames  never  meant  to  be  responsible  to  the  public.  They 
were  intended  for  his  select  and  exclusive  friends.  They  furnished 
food  for  that  modest  and  generous  opinion  which  they  delight  to 
entertain;  that  all  the  virtue,  and  all  the  talents,  as  well  as  all  the 
wealth  of  the  American  continent,  is  a  monopoly  of  their  own;  and 
that  the  rest  of  the  people  are  a  mere  herd  of  Sodom,  to  be  saved 
from  the  fire  of  Heaven  only  by  their  transcendent  merits.  So 
long  as  these  maggots  only  crawled  within  the  pale  of  the  church, 
their  mischief  was  confined  to  the  annoyance  of  occasional  visitors 
at  the  altar  of  the  idol;  but  where  thus  ushered  abroad,  they  might 
have  taken  wing  and  spread  a  plague  of  locusts  over  the  land. 

It  was  then,  an  examination  of  the  political  system  of  these 
self-styled  saviors  of  Sodom,  which  was  proposed  by  the  writer 
of  the  following  papers.  Their  doctrines  had  never  been  so  fully 
and  explicitly  avowed,  by  any  man  who  had  a  character  to  pledge. 
Like  the  priests  of  Egypt,  they  had  a  revelation  for  the  multitude, 
and  a  secret  for  the  initiated.  In  its  plenitude  of  perfection,  their 
creed  was  nowhere  to  be  found  in  a  tangible  shape.  To  make  way 
for  this  mass  of  illumination,  the  real  wisdom  and  virtue  of  Mr. 
Ames's  best  days,  his  public  labors  as  a  statesman,  at  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  federal  government,  his  speeches  openly  made  in  the 
face  of  the  country,  the  great  and  solid  foundation  of  his  honorable 
fame,  were  excluded  from  the  compilation.  Had  the  same  prin- 
ciples been  scrutinized  as  appearing  in  newspaper  paragraphs  and 
anonymous  pamphlets,  the  moment  they  were  brought  to  the 
test  they  would  have  been  universally  disavowed.  For  the  holders 
of  these  tenets,  like  the  Dutch  traders  of  Japan,  whenever  traffic 


3io  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

is  to  be  obtained  by  denial  of  their  Lord,  will  trample  upon  his 
cross  to  disprove  their  religion.  They  have  given  at  length  their 
confusion  of  political  faith  to  the  world,  and  it  was  only  under  the 
sanction  of  Mr.  Ames's  name,  that  it  could  be  properly  canvassed. 

It  may  perhaps  be  thought  that  the  conduct  of  these  friends  is 
here  judged  with  too  great  severity.  That  in  publishing  these 
opinions  of  Mr.  Ames,  they  are  not  responsible  for  them  as  their 
own;  and  that  even  the  errors  of  the  volume  ought  to  have  been 
overlooked,  in  consideration  of  the  general  excellence  of  the  author, 
and  the  valuable  matter  with  which  they  are  blended.  The  writer 
of  the  Review  is  not  insensible  to  the  moral  obligation  incumbent 
upon  a  man  of  generous  feelings  to  "hide  the  fault  he  sees,"  and 
to  veil  if  possible,  even  the  failings  of  a  fellow  citizen,  distinguished 
by  talents,  virtues  and  public  services.  It  is  that  obligation  which 
he  thinks  the  publishers  of  the  volume  have  violated.  As  a  free- 
born  American  citizen,  he  feels  a  duty  to  maintain  the  rights  and 
liberties  of  his  country,  not  less  imperious  than  that  of  respecting 
the  repose  of  death;  especially  when  he  perceives  that  a  stroke  is 
aimed  at  everything  which  this  nation  ought  to  hold  dear,  under 
the  shelter  of  a  presumption,  that  the  sanctuary  of  the  grave  would 
shield  the  offence  from  the  pursuit  of  justice;  and  that  a  name 
entitled  to  public  veneration  would  prove  a  passport  for  corruption 
to  which  no  man  living  dared  to  pledge  his  own.  For  it  must  be 
observed  that  the  compilers  have  been  as  penurious  of  their  own 
names,  as  they  have  been  prodigal  of  that  of  their  departed  friend. 
The  title  page  tells  us  that  they  are  a  number,  but  not  who  they 
are.  The  biography,  a  performance  which  in  point  of  composition 
would  do  honor  to  any  name,  yet  bears  not  that  of  its  author;  and 
the  very  private  letters,  divulged  in  the  face  of  their  own  injunc- 
tions of  secrecy,  are  directed  to  nothing  but  asterisks. 

The  writer  is  well  aware  that  party  spirit,  will  neither  give  him 
credit  for  his  real  motives  in  the  publication  of  these  papers,  nor 
forbear  from  the  imputation  of  others.  But  it  is  not  to  party 
spirit  that  he  meant  to  address  himself,  nor  to  partisans  that  he 
holds  himself  amenable.  Believing  in  the  general  sense  and  vir- 
tue of  his  countrymen,  he  asks  of  his  reader  that  effort  of  the  mind 


i8o9l  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  311 

which  Malebranche  demands  of  every  inquirer  after  truth  —  to 
separate  from  the  subject  every  prepossession  not  belonging  to  it, 
and  to  examine  without  any  partial  bias,  the  sentiments  advanced 
in  the  volume  and  contested  in  these  papers.  If  the  principles  to 
which  the  friends  of  Mr.  Ames  have  seen  fit  to  pledge  his  reputa- 
tion are  founded  in  eternal  truth,  to  dispute  them  is  nothing  less 
than  to  war  against  Omnipotence.  If  they  are  founded  in  error, 
no  apology  will  be  necessary,  for  an  attempt  to  arrest  their  progress 
at  their  influence  at  the  threshold. 

Should  the  reader  be  one  of  those,  whose  admiration  for  the 
genius  and  character  of  Mr.  Ames  is  a  feeling  in  which  he  delights 
to  indulge  himself,  and  which  he  is  unwilling  to  submit  to  the 
crucible  of  stubborn  reason,  he  is  requested  to  lay  aside  the  pam- 
phlet, and  continue  in  the  enjoyment  of  his  sensations.  Should 
he  think  it  a  more  profitable  course  to  test  his  principles  before 
he  carries  them  into  action,  let  him  examine  the  volume,  and  weigh 
the  objections  against  a  part  of  its  contents,  here  advanced;  after 
which  he  may  still  enjoy  his  admiration  of  the  man.  This  I  have 
no  inclination  to  disturb.  Let  him,  if  it  can  afford  him  any  grati- 
fication, suspect  the  motives  of  the  Reviewer.  But  let  him  renounce 
principles  demonstrated  to  be  false,  and  of  deadly  import  to  the 
independence  and  liberties  of  this  country. 

TO  THE  PRESIDENT  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES 

[JAMES  MADISON] 

BOSTON,  30  April,  1809. 
SIR: 

The  bearer  of  this  letter,  Mr.  Pickman,1  is  a  gentleman, 
with  whom  for  many  years  I  have  had  the  pleasure  of  a  very 
intimate  acquaintance,  and  for  whose  character  I  have  had 
every  reason  to  entertain  the  highest  esteem. 

Being  elected  a  member  of  the  House  of  Representatives 
of  the  United  States  to  the  present  Congress,  he  is  desirous  of 

1  Benjamin  Pickman  (1763-1843). 


3i2  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

a  personal  introduction  to  the  President,  and  in  taking  the 
liberty  to  introduce  him,  I  derive  much  satisfaction  from  the 
persuasion,  that  in  his  individual  capacity  you  will  find  him 
an  agreeable  acquaintance,  as  in  his  public  character  he  will 
be  a  faithful  representative  of  the  people. 

His  general  political  opinions  are  those  usually  included 
under  the  denomination  of  federalists:  his  particular  senti- 
ments, those  of  federalists  of  the  most  decided  cast.  Yet 
widely  as  my  own  sentiments  upon  the  recent  transactions 
and  discussions  which  have  agitated  the  country  differ  from 
those  which  he  has  entertained,  there  is  no  man  in  whose 
integrity  I  should  place  a  more  perfect  reliance  on  all  occa- 
sions; none  upon  whose  candor  and  fairness  of  mind  I  should 
more  fully  rely,  for  the  belief  that  he  will  support  every  meas- 
ure of  your  administration,  which  his  judgment  shall  approve. 

I  cannot  deny  myself  the  pleasure  which  this  opportunity 
affords  me  of  offering  you,  sir,  my  congratulations  upon  the 
favorable  change  in  the  aspect  of  our  public  affairs,  since 
your  accession  to  the  presidency,  and  of  presenting  you  my 
most  earnest  hopes,  that  the  just  and  honorable  principles, 
which  I  have  the  most  entire  confidence  will  govern  your 
administration,  may  be  crowned  with  success  beyond  the 
expectation  of  our  country's  best  friend,  and  equal  to  your 
own  wishes.  I  have  the  honor,  etc. 

TO  EZEKIEL  BACON 

BOSTON,  15  June,  1809. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

•  •••••• 

Of  the  share  in  the  public  measures,  which  I  have  had  by 
my  public  conduct  and  by  my  well  meant  opinions,  given  at 
your  request,  and  that  of  other  friends  devoted  to  the  same 


1809]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  313 

cause,  I  never  have  been  at  any  moment  inclined  to  disclaim 
one  title.  If  in  the  course  of  our  late  history,  I  have  felt  one 
strong  regret,  it  was  that  my  share  in  the  proposition  and 
support  of  the  measures  adopted  was  not  greater.  I  am  not 
aware,  indeed,  that  it  could  have  been  greater,  and  I  have 
found  myself  held  at  least  to  my  share  of  responsibility  for 
them.  That  responsibility,  however,  I  continue  to  cherish, 
even  in  the  high  forms  of  reproach  that  it  has  assumed  from 
both  parties,  and  I  take  more  pride  than  is  perfectly  con- 
sistent with  wisdom,  to  find  Duane  beginning  to  load  me 
with  the  non-intercourse  act,  while  the  holy  blunderbusses 
of  the  pulpit  and  the  pop-guns  of  the  Ancient  and  Honorable 
Artillery  are  battering  me  with  a  cross  fire  of  embargo. 

I  shall  as  little  dread  the  reproach  of  having  contributed 
to  the  non-intercourse,  as  I  do  that  of  having  pledged  every- 
thing that  I  had  to  pledge  upon  the  embargo.  In  the  sub- 
stitution, however,  of  the  non-intercourse,  as  I  had  neither 
voice  nor  vote  for  which  I  was  amenable  to  the  country,  I 
cannot  claim  in  the  minds  of  those  who  consider  it  was  a 
merit,  that  share  which  ought  justly  to  be  reserved  for  the 
members  in  both  houses  of  Congress,  who  actually  supported 
it  with  both.  I  consider  the  whole  series  of  measures,  from 
the  non-importation  act  to  the  proclamation  of  19  April, 
both  inclusive,  as  links  of  one  connected  system,  and  my 
confidence  in  its  eventual  success  is  daily  gaining  strength. 
If  Mr.  Randolph,  or  Mr.  Gardenier,  or  any  other  man  of 
their  sense  and  standing  in  society,  thinks  sincerely  that 
Mr.  Madison's  readiness  in  acceding  to  the  proposals  of 
Great  Britain  is  the  commencement  of  a  new  system,  which 
as  such  they  are  willing  to  hail  with  approbation,  I  should  not 
desire  to  disturb  them  in  their  generous  feelings,  but  I  shall 
take  the  liberty  to  persist  in  my  opinion,  that  the  non- 
importation, the  embargo,  the  non-intercourse,  and  the 


314  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

proclamation  of  19  April,1  are  all  parts  of  one  and  the  same 
whole,  and  in  my  approbation  of  them  all. 

Mr.  Randolph's  speeches  are  very  amusing,  and  very 
popular  among  the  enemies  of  the  administration.  Among 
the  federalists  with  us,  however,  there  are  great  numbers 
who  will  finally  support  Mr.  Madison,  provided  he  does  not 
quarrel  with  England,  but  on  no  other  contingency.  You  will 
see  that  in  their  newspapers  they  are  already  loud  in  their 
support  of  our  right  to  the  colonial  trade,  and  willing  to 
devote  the  British  Ministry  to  execration,  if  they  should  have 
been  playing  a  false  game  in  the  late  negotiation.  This  lan- 
guage will  be  held,  until  it  is  ascertained  whether  England 
does  really  mean  to  continue  substantially  her  system  of 
blockade.  If  she  does  their  execrations  will  vanish  in  smoke; 
they  will  again  join  her  in  denying  our  right  to  the  colonial 
trade,  and  asserting  her  right  of  impressment,  and  they  will 
hang  like  millstones  on  the  neck  of  Mr.  Madison's  measures, 
be  they  what  they  may;  in  short  they  will  act  over  again  the 
patriotism  of  the  last  eighteen  months. 

There  is  some  uneasiness  respecting  these  new  Orders  in 
Council,  which  are  as  inconsistent  with  the  laws  of  nations 
and  with  our  rights  as  their  predecessors.  The  English 
newspapers  pretend,  and  ours  have  copied  the  paragraph 
from  them,  that  these  Orders  were  issued  with  the  approba- 
tion of  Mr.  Pinkney,  our  minister,  which  surely  cannot  be 
possible.  We  are  in  expectation  of  some  explanation  upon 
the  subject  from  Washington,  and  in  the  meantime  hope  that 
the  new  Orders  are  only  a  change  of  phase  in  the  British 
orb,  portending  another  speedily  to  ensue.2 

1  On  the  proclamation  see  Henry  Adams,  History,  V.  chap.  iv. 

2  Order  in  Council,  April  26,  revoking  the  Order  of  November  1 1,  1807,  and  estab- 
lishing in  its  place  a  general  blockade  of  Holland,  France  and  Italy.    The  first  intel- 
ligence of  the  order  reached  the  United  States  June  10.    Adams,  History,  V.  81. 


1809]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  315 

Perhaps  they  may  tend  to  solve  the  difficulty  which  you 
suggest  as  having  arisen,  respecting  the  exclusion  of  foreign 
armed  vessels  from  our  ports  and  harbors.  I  have  been  long 
of  opinion,  that  the  principle  of  total  exclusion,  excepting 
under  treaty  stipulations,  ought  to  be  assumed  as  a  per- 
manent maxim  of  our  government.  I  was  for  assuming  it 
two  years  ago,  and  I  should  have  been  for  assuming  it  now, 
as  reported  to  the  Senate  by  Mr.  Giles.  I  know  that  it  would 
have  raised  a  clamor  from  the  English  faction,  and  that  all 
the  enemies  of  Mr.  Madison  would  have  joined  in  it.  But 
far  from  thinking  it  ill-timed,  I  am  afraid  there  will  never 
be  so  favorable  a  time  for  setting  it  up  as  this  would  have 
been.  However,  those  who  are  on  the  spot  have  the  best 
means  of  judging  on  the  expediency  of  the  time,  and  I  speak 
this  with  submission  to  your  better  opinion.  If  the  total 
exclusion  must  be  given  up,  then  I  should,  I  think,  incline 
against  a  discrimination.  Indeed,  I  do  not  see  upon  what 
sound  principle  a  discrimination  could  be  made.  The  orig- 
inal exclusion  of  British  armed  ships  was  in  consequence 
of  the  attack  on  the  Chesapeake.  It  was  a  British  offence, 
and  the  penalty  applied  to  that  was  distinct  from  all  the 
other  measures  of  defence  against  foreign  aggressions. 
Atonement  having  been  made  and  accepted  for  that  offence, 
the  exclusion  of  their  armed  ships  on  that  account  ought,  of 
course,  to  cease.  But  on  that  account  it  could  not  be  applied 
to  French  ships.  Now,  although  the  exclusion  was  incor- 
porated into  the  non-intercourse  law,  and  thus  extended  to 
France  as  well  as  Britain,  yet  the  only  fair  principle  upon 
which  it  could  be  done  was,  that  of  having  adopted  the  total 
exclusion,  and  exercising  the  right  reserved  to  us  against 
both  belligerents. 

I  have  always  thought  that  the  complaints  of  the  English 
government  in  regard  to  this  partial  exclusion  were  not  with- 


3i6  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

out  foundation.  And  it  was  on  this  principle,  that  when  the 
law,  upon  which  Mr.  Jefferson's  excluding  Proclamation 
issued,  passed  in  Congress,  I  opposed  it  with  all  my  most 
fruitless  zeal.  I  mean  the  law  of  3  March,  1805.  Under  that 
law  I  considered  the  President  as  bound  in  duty  to  issue  the 
Proclamation,  and  after  it  was  issued  the  nation  was  bound 
to  support  it.  But  there  never  was  a  law  enacted  while  I 
sat  in  Congress,  which  I  more  strenuously  opposed,  and  my 
negative  vote  stands  recorded  with  only  three  others  on  the 
Senate's  journals.  None  of  those  who  have  since  abused  Mr. 
Jefferson  for  issuing  his  Proclamation  as  that  law  required, 
would  then  join  me  in  voting  against  the  law. 

If  we  exclude  the  armed  vessels  of  France,  while  we  admit 
those  of  England,  we  shall  certainly  have  the  same  com- 
plaints from  France  that  England  made  against  the  Proc- 
lamation, and  we  shall  not  have  an  attack  like  that  on  the 
Chesapeake  to  plead  in  answer.  Perhaps  you  will  say,  we 
shall  discriminate  by  leaving  the  interdict  upon  trade,  and 
why  not  by  the  exclusion  of  armed  ships?  Because  trade  is 
an  affair  of  peace,  and  the  admission  or  exclusion  of  armed 
ships  operates  peculiarly  upon  the  state  of  war.  In  one  case 
you  are  dealing  as  with  commercial  nations,  in  the  other  you 
are  dealing  as  with  belligerents.  I  have  not  room  to  unfold 
this  idea  in  all  its  bearings,  but  I  am  sure  you  will  under- 
stand it  on  this  hint.  If  it  should  not  meet  your  approbation 
I  am  sure  it  will  have  your  candid  consideration.  I  am,  etc. 

TO  WILLIAM  EUSTIS  * 

BOSTON,  22  June,  1809. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

I  have  received  your  obliging  favor  of  the  loth  instant 

1  Secretary  of  War. 


i8o9]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  317 

but  this  moment,  and  very  sincerely  thank  you  for  the  in- 
timations contained  in  it.  The  publications  to  which  you 
allude  I  believe  will  soon  be  concluded,  perhaps  this  or  the 
next  week.1  They  were  not  commenced  without  much  de- 
liberation, nor  without  a  full  estimate  of  the  spirit  which 
they  would  kindle  up  respecting  their  author,  and  of  the 
power  over  the  public  mind,  which  that  spirit  would  possess. 
Of  the  importance  of  the  facts  which  they  have  disclosed  and 
are  disclosing,  not  merely  to  the  reputation  of  the  writer,  but 
to  the  interests  of  this  nation  and  to  its  welfare,  it  is  probable 
the  men  of  other  times  will  be  better  judges  than  any  of  the 
present  public.  My  own  judgment  of  them  must  of  course 
be  partial,  for  there  seems  to  me  to  be  more  true  history  in 
them,  than  in  all  the  collections  of  our  Historical  Society. 
There  is  indeed  more  true  history  in  them,  than  it  may  suit 
the  feelings  of  any  description  of  our  politicians  and  states- 
men to  have  told.  But  as  the  historian  is  as  much  out  of  the 

1  John  Adams'  letters  to  the  Boston  Patriot,  began  April  15,  1809.  They  were 
gathered  and  published  in  a  pamphlet:  Correspondence  of  the  Late  President  Adams; 
originally  published  in  the  Boston  Patriot,  in  a  Series  of  Letters.  Boston,  1809. 
A  Baltimore  issue  was  also  made  by  Hezekiah  Niles.  Portions  are  reprinted  in 
Works  of  John  Adams,  IX.  241,  with  a  preliminary  note  by  Charles  Francis  Adams. 
"Your  father  in  doing  justice  to  his  own  fame,  has  at  the  same  time  disclosed  facts 
and  explained  some  particular  transactions  in  a  manner  calculated  to  disclose  the 
views  of  men  of  great  influence  over  the  public  mind,  and  served  the  true  interests 
of  his  country.  .  .  .  This  leads  me  to  observe  that  it  is  time  to  finish.  You  know 
the  nature  of  the  public  mind.  If  you  give  it  roast  meat  every  day  it  cloys,  and  how 
many  men  have  written  too  much.  Aware  of  the  delicacy  of  a  suggestion  of  this 
nature  I  cannot  withhold  it.  An  interest  in  his  fame  is  a  self-justification.  Wishing 
him  and  you  life  enough  to  see  justice  triumph  over  the  prejudice,  misrepresentation 
and  passion  of  the  moment,  I  am,  etc."  William  Eustis  to  John  Quincy  Adams, 
June  10,  1809.  "I  showed  my  father  Eustis's  letter  to  me;  with  which  he  was  very 
much  offended;  he  thought  it  contained  an  indirect  insinuation  that  his  object  in 
his  present  publication  was  to  get  me  nominated  to  an  office,  and  he  advised  me, 
if  I  should  be  nominated  to  St.  Petersburg,  to  refuse  the  nomination.  He  declared 
his  determination  to  continue  his  publications,  which  I  had  supposed  he  meant  to 
suspend  for  the  present."  Ms.  Diary. 


3i8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

influence  of  hope  and  of  fear,  as  Tacitus  declares  himself  to 
have  been  in  writing  the  tale  of  his  times,  he  neither  has 
taken,  nor  will  take,  the  thermometer  of  popular  feeling  at 
the  present  moment  for  a  guide  respecting  the  continuance 
or  cessation  of  his  writings.  Were  my  own  inclined  to  con- 
sult the  prudential  considerations  of  this  hour  more  than 
his,  he  would  certainly  decide  according  to  his  own  judgment 
and  not  according  to  mine.  The  particular  subject  upon 
which  the  correspondence  commenced  has,  I  believe,  been 
closed  as  to  the  writing,  and  will  be  printed  within  the  time 
I  have  mentioned;  and  nothing  further  is  intended  for  the 
present. 

Yes,  I  believe  with  you  that  the  first  of  qualities  for  a 
great  statesman  is  to  be  honest.  And  if  it  were  possible  that 
this  opinion  were  an  error,  I  should  rather  carry  it  with  me 
to  my  grave,  than  to  believe  that  a  man  cannot  be  a  states- 
man without  being  dishonest.  I  have,  and  must  have,  con- 
fidence in  the  possible  virtue  of  human  nature;  and  although 
in  entertaining  this  idea,  a  man  must,  and  will  sometimes, 
be  disappointed,  yet  if  it  is  coupled  with  a  sound  judgment 
and  close  observation,  I  believe  he  could  make  fewer  great 
mistakes,  than  one  whose  principle  is  the  universal  rascality 
of  the  species.  When  Alexander  swallowed  the  medicine 
offered  him  by  Philip  his  physician,  after  an  anonymous 
warning  that  Philip  had  been  bribed  to  poison  him,  Alex- 
ander might  have  been  mistaken.  He  staked  his  life  upon 
the  belief  in  Philip's  honesty.  It  was  the  most  heroic  action 
of  his  life.  But  its  heroism  consists  in  his  confidence  in 
human  virtue,  combined  with  the  accuracy  of  his  judgment 
in  the  individual  application  of  it.  Had  Philip  really  been 
the  corrupt  villain,  and  administered  poison,  Alexander's 
confidence  would  have  been  as  noble,  but  the  event  would 
have  proved  his  judgment  in  that  instance  incorrect.  All 


i8C9]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  319 

men  profess  honesty  as  long  as  they  can.  To  believe  all  men 
honest,  would  be  folly.  To  believe  none  so,  is  something 
worse. 

I  rejoice  that  your  conviction  in  the  honesty  of  Mr. 
Madison  has  been  confirmed  by  the  opportunity  you  now 
have  of  ascertaining  it  conclusively.  I  have  entertained  that 
confidence  in  him  at  a  time  when,  if  I  had  lent  an  ear  to 
prejudices,  they  would  have  led  at  least  to  suspicion;  and 
although  if  the  event  had  proved  me  mistaken  in  my  con- 
fidence, I  should  not  have  renounced  my  theory  of  human 
nature,  I  should  certainly  have  felt  conscious  that  in  the 
application  of  my  principle  I  had  committed  an  error  of 
judgment.  I  hope  you  will  not  conclude  from  this  reasoning 
that  I  mean  to  make  Mr.  Madison's  honesty  prove  me  a 
hero.  I  did  not  stake  my  life  upon  the  issue. 

What  I  did  stake  was  enough  to  make  me  feel  no  slight 
gratification  in  the  daily  accumulating  public  evidence,  that 
I  was  not  mistaken.  And  whether  I  live  long  enough  to  sur- 
vive the  passions,  and  prejudices,  and  personal  enmities 
which  my  conduct  and  the  course  of  events  have  brought 
upon  me  or  not,  I  have  no  fear  that  either  my  father  or  my- 
self will  leave  to  after  ages  a  name,  at  which  my  children  will 
ever  have  occasion  to  blush. 

Our  legislature  have  risen  after  a  short  session,  in  which 
nothing  of  any  consequence  has  been  done.  It  has,  indeed, 
been  a  session  of  much  profession  and  little  action.  The 
principal  occupation  has  been  party  management  to  claim 
the  victory  in  the  midst  of  a  retreat.  Very  patriotic  pro- 
fessions have  been  made  and  echoed,  and  the  principle  of 
confining  offices  to  one  party  has  been  reprobated  in  theory, 
as  much  as  it  is  followed  in  practice.  I  have  no  doubt  that 
overtures  of  a  very  conciliatory  nature  have  been  made  to 
Mr.  Madison  from  the  predominating  party  here,  and  I 


320  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

presume  you  know  more  of  them  than  I  can  inform  you. 
Perhaps  you  also  know  that  among  his  and  your  friends,  there 
is  some  uneasiness  under  the  apprehension  of  a  coalition 
from  which,  in  respect  to  party  views,  they  might  be  the 
sufferers.  Of  all  this  I  have  heard  a  little,  but  it  being  a 
subject  in  which  I  have  no  inclination  to  meddle,  I  have  felt 
not  much  interest  in  the  purposes  of  either  side. 

The  readiness  with  which  the  propositions  from  England 
were  received  by  Mr.  Madison  has  given  universal  satisfac- 
tion in  this  quarter,  and  rendered  the  commencement  of  his 
administration  extremely  popular.  There  is  a  wish,  feebly 
intimated  rather  than  directly  asserted  from  a  certain  quar- 
ter, that  measures  hostile  to  France  might  be  adopted.  I 
observe  the  same  thing  in  the  congressional  manceuvering 
at  Washington,  but  I  hope  it  will  not  be  suffered  to  prevail. 
Senseless  and  cruel  as  the  conduct  of  France  towards  this 
country  has  been,  I  still  wish  that  a  war  with  her  may  be 
avoided.  As  Great  Britain  is  now  upon  her  good  behavior, 
I  cherish  a  slight  hope  that  Mr.  Madison  will  yet  signalize 
his  administration  by  obtaining  from  her  justice  and  our 
rights.  At  any  rate  that  we  shall  escape  a  war  with  her,  and 
yet  surrender  nothing  essential.  But  no  alliance  with  the 
British  lion;  no  common  cause  against  the  Corsican! 

If  in  the  occasional  moments  of  leisure  which  the  duties  of 
your  office  may  allow,  you  can  now  and  then  spare  a  line  of 
communication  to  me,  I  shall  esteem  it  as  a  favor,  and  will 
promise  not  to  burthen  you  with  any  more  such  length  of 
epistle  in  return.  I  am,  etc. 

P.  S.  26  June.  The  subject  of  the  negotiation  with  France 
in  1800  is,  as  I  have  mentioned,  concluded  in  my  father's 
correspondence.  But  he  proposes  to  continue  immediately 
the  publication  of  letters  upon  a  different  subject,  the  peace 
of  1783. 


i8o9]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  321 

A  word  about  your  postcript.1  Am  I  to  consider  it  as  a 
question  or  a  hint  ?  If  a  question  I  answer  NO.  If  a  hint  I  do 
not  understand  it. 

COMMISSION 

JAMES  MADISON,  President  of  the  United  States  of  America, 
To  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS,— GREETING: 

Reposing  special  Trust  and  Confidence  in  your  Integrity,  pru- 
dence and  Ability,  I  have  nominated  and  by  and  with  the  advice 
and  consent  of  the  Senate,  appointed  you  the  said  John  Quincy 
Adams,  Minister  Plenipotentiary  for  the  United  States  of  America, 
at  the  Court  of  His  Imperial  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  Russia; 
authorizing  you  hereby  to  do  and  perform  all  such  matters  and 
things  as  to  the  said  place  or  office  doth  appertain,  or  as  may  be 
duly  given  you  in  charge  hereafter;  and  the  said  Office  to  hold 
and  exercise  during  the  pleasure  of  the  President  of  the  United 
States;  for  the  time  being. 

IN  TESTIMONY  Whereof,  I  have  caused  the  Seal  of  the 
United  States  to  be  hereunto  affixed. 

Given  under  my  hand  at  the  City  of  Washington  the  Twenty- 
Seventh  day  of  June  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  Eight 

!"!  think  the  nomination  to  St.  Petersburg  will  be  made  this  session."  On 
June  26,  the  President  sent  to  the  Senate  a  message  nominating  Adams  to  be 
minister  plenipotentiary  of  the  United  States  to  the  court  of  St.  Petersburg,  with 
documents  showing  the  fitness  of  the  opportunity.  American  State  Papers,  Foreign 
Relations,  III.  298.  The  nomination  was  confirmed  the  next  day  by  a  vote  of 
nineteen  to  seven. 

"So  far  as  your  public  sentiments  and  conduct  may  have  an  influence  on  the 
public  mind,  your  friends  would  certainly  have  preferred  that  the  theater  of  your 
employments  should  have  been  on  American  ground.  A  mission  to  the  Court  of 
St.  Petersburg  is,  to  a  man  of  active  talents,  somewhat  like  an  honorable  exile;  in 
which  point  of  view  I  hear  it  has  been  remarked  by  your  old  friend  Col.  P[ickering], 
that  'he  believed  upon  the  whole  the  best  thing  that  could  be  done  with  you  was 
to  send  you  out  of  the  country.'  Though  your  friends  will  not  probably  accede 
to  the  position  that  it  was  the  best  thing,  yet  they  will  very  readily  agree  that  it  was 
a  very  good  thing."  Ezekiel  Bacon  to  John  Quincy  Adams,  June  29,  1809.  Ms. 


322 


THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 


hundred  and  Nine;  and  of  the  Independence  of  the  United  States 
of  America,  the  Thirty-third. 

JAMES  MADISON. 

By  the  President. 
R.  SMITH, 

Secretary  of  State. 

SECRETARY  OF  STATE  TO  WILLIAM  SHORT  1 

Department  of  State,  September  8th,  1808. 

SIR: 

The  President  having  thought  it  expedient  for  the  interests  of 
the  United  States  that  a  minister  plenipotentiary  should  be  sent 

1  In  place  of  special  instructions,  Adams  was  given  copies  of  what  had  been  given 
to  Short  and  Armstrong.  The  essential  parts  of  the  Armstrong  dispatch  follow: 

"The  rein  given  by  Great  Britain  thro'  the  arbitrary  decisions  of  her  Admiralty 
Courts,  to  the  cruizers  against  our  commerce,  has  produced  already  heavy  losses 
to  our  merchants  and  a  very  general  indignation  throughout  the  nation.  You 
will  have  observed  the  notice  taken  of  the  British  conduct  in  the  message  of  the 
President  to  Congress  at  the  opening  of  the  session.  I  now  transmit  a  copy  of  a 
special  message  on  the  subject,  with  copies  of  sundry  memorials  from  our  merchants, 
and  of  diplomatic  documents,  explaining  the  extent  of  the  evil,  and  the  grounds  of 
our  remonstrances  against  it;  to  which  I  have  thought  it  not  improper  to  add  a 
printed  examination  of  the  doctrine  asserted  by  G.  Britain  as  the  basis  of  her  war- 
fare on  neutral  commerce.  These  materials  will  put  you  in  possession  of  the  extent 
of  the  neutral  right  claimed  by  the  United  States,  of  the  reasoning  by  which  it  is 
maintained,  and  of  the  great  interest  they  have  in  maintaining  it. 

"What  effect  the  communications  made  to  Congress  may  have  on  their  counsels; 
cannot  yet  be  pronounced.  The  subject  is  expected  to  undergo  an  early  and  very 
serious  consideration,  and  will  probably  end  in  some  measures  addressed  to  the 
interest  of  Great  Britain;  unless  a  hope  should  be  indulged  that  a  voluntary  ad- 
justment with  her  will  render  them  unnecessary,  or  that  the  course  and  issue  of 
the  contest  in  Europe  may  supply  a  remedy. 

"In  this  state  of  things,  the  President  reflecting  on  the  interest  and  the  way  of 
thinking  which  has  prevailed  among  all  the  great  powers  of  Europe,  as  well  those 
allied  as  those  at  war  with  Great  Britain  concerning  the  maritime  rights  of  neu- 
trality, conceives  that  it  may  be  useful  to  enter  into  certain  explanations,  with  the 
principal  at  least  of  those  powers,  particularly  the  two  Emperors  of  France  and  of 
Russia,  with  a  view  to  promote  an  incorporation  of  the  most  important  of  those 
rights  into  a  Treaty  of  peace. 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  323 

to  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  he  is  desirous  of  availing  them  of  your 
services  on  the  occasion.  You  will  accordingly  herewith  receive  a 
commission  and  a  letter  of  credence  to  the  Emperor. 

"You  are  accordingly  authorized  and  instructed  to  take  an  early  occasion  of 
intimating  to  the  French  government  how  much  the  United  States  have  this  object 
at  heart,  and  how  much  confidence  they  have  in  the  efficacy  of  such  an  arrange- 
ment under  such  auspices. 

"With  respect  to  the  particular  rights  to  be  placed  under  the  guaranty  of  a 
general  treaty  of  peace,  it  will  naturally  occur  that  the  one  having  the  first  place 
in  the  wishes  of  the  United  States  is  that  which  is  at  present  violated  by  the  British 
principle  subjecting  to  capture  every  trade  opened  by  a  belligerent  to  a  neutral 
nation  during  war,  and  in  which  both  the  United  States  as  a  neutral  and  France  as 
a  belligerent  nation  have  so  deep  an  interest.  It  will  be  recollected  that  this  right 
stands  foremost  in  the  list  comprized  in  the  two  plans  of  armed  neutrality  in  1780 
and  1800.  In  general  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  United  States  are  friendly  to 
the  principles  of  those  conventions,  and  would  see  with  pleasure  all  of  them  effec- 
tually and  permanently  recognized  as  principles  of  the  established  law  of  nations. 
The  ideas  of  this  government  would  extend  even  further  in  relation  at  least  to 
contraband  of  war;  the  list  of  which  as  retained  by  those  conventions,  and  as  limited 
by  the  generality  of  modern  treaties,  is  a  source  and  a  pretext  for  much  vexation 
to  the  commerce  of  neutrals,  whilst  it  is  of  little  real  importance  to  the  belligerent 
parties.  The  reason  is  obvious.  In  the  present  state  of  the  arts  throughout  Europe, 
every  nation  possesses,  or  may  easily  possess  within  itself  the  faculty  of  supplying 
all  the  ordinary  munitions  of  war.  Originally  the  case  was  different,  and  for  that 
reason  only  it  would  seem  that  the  articles  in  question  were  placed  on  the  contra- 
band list.  The  articles  which  alone  fall  within  the  original  reason,  are  naval  stores; 
and  if  these  are  expunged  from  the  list  of  contraband,  it  is  manifest  that  an  abolition 
of  the  list  altogether  would  be  a  change  in  the  law  of  nations,  to  which  little  objec- 
tion ought  to  be  made. 

"On  the  subject  of  'free  ships  free  goods,'  the  United  States  cannot  with  the 
same  consistency,  as  some  other  nations  maintain  the  principle  as  already  a  part 
of  the  law  of  nations;  having  on  one  occasion  admitted,  and  on  another  stipulated 
the  contrary.  They  have  however  invariably  maintained  the  utility  of  the  principle, 
and  whilst  as  a  pacific  and  commercial  nation  they  have  as  great  an  interest  in  the 
due  establishment  of  it,  as  any  nation  whatever;  they  may  with  perfect  consistency 
promote  such  an  extension  of  neutral  rights.  The  northern  powers,  Russia  among 
the  rest,  having  fluctuated  in  their  conduct,  may  also  be  under  some  restraints  on 
this  subject.  Still  they  may  be  ready  to  renew  their  concurrence  in  voluntary  and 
conventional  arrangements  for  giving  validity  to  the  principle,  and  in  drawing 
Great  Britain  into  them. 

"Russia  may  also  feel  respect  for  the  footing  on  which  her  explanatory  article 


324  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

You  will  see  in  the  latter,  a  copy  of  which  is  furnished,  the  gen- 
eral purposes  of  your  mission.  It  has  been  invited  by  the  friend- 

with  Great  Britain  of  October  20,  1801,  has  placed  the  commerce  of  neutrals  with 
belligerent  colonies.  Even  with  that  limitation,  provided  it  be  applied  not  to  the 
right  itself  asserted  by  the  convention  of  June,  1801,  but  to  the  exercise  of  the  right, 
the  commerce  of  neutrals  would  be  on  a  footing  acceptable  to  the  United  States. 
And  although  it  might  be  less  so  to  France,  it  still  deserves  her  consideration 
whether,  such  a  provision,  which  secures  in  time  of  war  all  the  necessary  supplies 
of  her  colonies,  and  to  her  own  markets,  the  necessary  colonial  productions,  ought 
not  to  be  embraced  in  case  Russia  should  refuse  to  cooperate  for  a  more  complete 
provision.  It  is  to  be  hoped  however,  that  she  will  resume  the  principle  in  the 
latitude  given  to  it  in  the  convention  itself  of  June,  1801,  and  that  the  joint  influ- 
ence of  Russia  and  France  will  be  effectual  in  engaging  the  concurrence  of  Great 
Britain  and  the  other  maritime  powers  of  Europe. 

"The  only  remaining  subject,  requiring  notice  is  that  of  convoys.  The  neutral 
claim  on  this  subject  was  not  included  in  the  armed  neutrality  of  1780.  Altho'  the 
United  States  cannot  but  befriend  it  as  favorable  to  the  security  and  interest  of 
neutral  commerce,  yet  the  plausible  objections  made  to  the  claim  by  Great  Britain 
in  its  indefinite  extent,  and  her  probable  inflexibility  in  the  objections,  may  render 
it  expedient  to  substitute  the  modifications  already  admitted  by  Russia  in  the 
treaty  of  June,  1801.  With  such  modifications,  the  right  seems  to  be  sufficiently 
valuable  to  deserve  a  place  in  a  general  provision  for  neutral  rights. 

"  Having  given  this  explanation  of  our  views  on  this  occasion,  it  will  be  necessary 
to  say  something  with  respect  to  a  participation  of  the  United  States  in  the  means 
of  giving  them  effect.  Such  a  participation  may  refer  ist,  to  a  Congress  for  making 
peace;  2d,  to  the  guaranty  of  neutral  rights  which  a  treaty  of  peace  may  provide. 
As  to  the  first  it  may  happen  that  the  occasion  will  be  over  before  arrangements 
could  be  made  for  giving  the  United  States  a  representation  in  such  a  Congress. 
But  on  a  contrary  supposition  it  is  not  seen  that  there  would  be  much  advantage 
or  propriety  in  the  measure  whilst  it  would  expose  us  to  all  the  snares  which  might 
be  laid  for  entangling  us  in  the  politics  of  Europe,  and  in  the  plans  of  those  who 
may  predominate  in  the  negotiations.  Should  any  disposition  therefore  be  dis- 
covered to  invite  the  United  States  into  the  scene,  it  will  be  proper  for  you  by  polite 
and  friendly  explanations  to  repress  it.  As  to  the  second  point,  it  will  be  still  more 
important  not  to  bind  the  United  States  to  any  participation  in  such  a  guaranty, 
and  consequently  to  avoid  raising  any  expectation,  that  they  will  accede  to  an  ar- 
ticle for  the  purpose,  if  an  opportunity  of  so  doing  should  be  reserved  to  neutral 
nations  not  parties  to  the  Treaty. 

"  Notwithstanding  this  refusal  of  the  United  States  to  become  parties  to  the  nego- 
tiation and  stipulation  of  a  guaranty  of  neutral  rights,  the  deep  interest  which  they 
have  therein,  will  justify  the  solicitude  which  you  may  express  on  the  subject; 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  325 

ship,  not  to  say  partiality  of  the  Emperor  towards  the  United 
States,  expressed  in  letters  from  him  to  the  President,  as  well  as 
otherwise  manifested  by  suggestions  thro'  official  channels  that 
such  a  mission  would  be  agreeable  to  him;  by  the  occasion  pre- 
sented in  the  notification  to  the  United  States  as  a  neutral  nation, 
of  the  late  war  into  which  his  Imperial  Majesty  had  entered;  lastly, 
by  the  liberal  principles  and  policy  entertained  by  him  with  re- 
spect to  the  rights  of  the  sea,  and  by  the  influence  which  the 
high  station  of  Russia,  and  her  peculiar  bearing  on  the  pre- 
dominant powers  of  Europe,  must  have  on  questions  of  univer- 
sal interest  not  only  incident  to  the  course  of  the  war,  but 
which  may  enter  into  the  discussions  and  arrangements  for  termi- 
nating it. 

It  will  be  your  duty  therefore  to  cultivate  the  good  dispositions 
of  the  Emperor  on  every  point  interesting  to  the  United  States  by 
assuring  him  of  their  sensibility  to  all  the  marks  of  his  friendship, 
and  of  the  value  they  place  on  it;  by  explaining  to  him  the  pacific 
and  just  principles  which  form  the  basis  of  their  policy,  by  tracing 
the  conformity  of  the  rules  of  public  law  between  belligerents  and 
neutrals  recognized  by  the  United  States,  to  those  maintained  by 
his  Imperial  Majesty,  as  far  as  this  conformity  may  extend,  and 
by  pointing  out  the  true  grounds  on  which  variations  in  those  of 
the  United  States,  may  rest.  You  will  be  enabled  to  enter  into 
these  explanations  by  the  documents  communicated  from  time  to 
time  to  Congress,  copies  of  which  you  will  possess,  and  by  the  ac- 
companying copy  of  a  letter  of  the  I4th  day  of  March,  1806,  to 

and  the  weight  which  the  sentiments  and  interest  of  so  rising  a  power  must  have, 
more  particularly  with  Great  Britain,  will  justify  the  species  of  interposition  which 
you  are  authorized  to  use.  This  may  be  strengthened  also  by  intimating  that 
altho'  the  United  States,  taking  into  view  their  distance  and  abstraction  from  the 
powers  of  Europe,  and  the  peculiar  structure  of  their  government,  are  unwilling 
to  enter  into  any  specific  engagements,  particularly  of  a  military  nature,  yet  that 
they  could  not  see  with  indifference  a  violation  of  a  system  of  rights  so  precious  to 
them,  and  that  they  might  not  improbably  avail  themselves  of  the  means  which 
they  possess  in  a  peculiar  degree,  of  making  it  the  interest  of  commercial  and  manu- 
facturing nations,  to  respect  such  a  system."  Secretary  of  State  to  John  Armstrong, 
March  14,  1806.  Ms. 


326  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1808 

General  Armstrong,  a  copy  of  which  was  transmitted  to  our  consul 
at  St.  Petersburg. 

It  being  impossible  to  know  what  the  future  conduct  of  the  bel- 
ligerent powers  may  be  towards  neutrals,  or  to  foresee  what  par- 
ticular policy  in  relation  to  this  continent  may  find  its  way  into  a 
general  pacification,  it  cannot  be  unimportant,  to  have,  in  a  party 
so  powerful  and  influential  as  Russia,  a  good  will  and  wakeful 
attention  to  the  just  rights,  and  interests  of  the  United  States,  as 
these  may  be  involved  in  the  course  of  events.  To  secure  this 
advantage  being  the  primary  object  of  your  mission,  these  general 
instructions  will  for  the  present  be  sufficient. 

As  there  may,  however,  be  a  desire  on  the  part  of  the  Emperor 
to  enter  into  explanatory  or  declaratory  stipulations  on  points 
affecting  the  relations  of  belligerent  with  neutral  powers,  or  into 
conventional  regulations  for  the  commerce  between  the  two  coun- 
tries, an  early  opportunity  will  be  taken  to  forward  such  further 
instructions  as  will  explain  the  views  of  the  President  in  these 
respects. 

In  the  mean  time,  you  will  let  the  Russian  government  under- 
stand that  the  existing  laws  of  the  United  States  which  place 
Russia  on  the  footing  of  the  most  favored  nation,  entitle  their 
citizens  to  a  correspondent  footing  in  the  commerce  of  that  Em- 
pire; and  it  will  be  proper  for  you,  availing  yourself  of  the  informa- 
tion and  experience  of  Mr.  Harris,  to  promote  such  changes  in 
existing  regulations  as  may  have  that  tendency,  or  be  otherwise 
favorable  to  the  commerce  of  the  United  States. 

You  will  find  no  difficulty  in  presenting  the  embargo  in  lights, 
which  will  satisfy  his  Imperial  Majesty  that  it  was  prescribed  by 
the  circumstances  in  which  the  commerce  of  the  United  States  was 
placed  by  the  destructive  edicts  of  Great  Britain  and  France;  and 
that  as  the  efficacy  of  the  measure  would  be  frustrated  by  excep- 
tions in  reference  to  more  just  and  friendly  nations,  they  could 
not  be  made  even  in  behalf  of  our  commerce  with  Russia,  who  is 
seen  with  satisfaction  to  have  avoided  those  belligerent  examples, 
by  limiting  her  retaliating  decree  of  [  ]  to  cases,  within  the 


i8o8]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  327 

uncontested  authority  of  every  nation.  Whether  in  this  limited 
interdiction  his  Imperial  Majesty  has  consulted  the  best  interests 
of  his  subjects,  as  well  as  exercised  no  more  than  a  rightful  au- 
thority, is  a  question  which  belongs  to  himself  alone  to  decide. 

As  it  will  best  consist  with  other  public  arrangements,  that  you 
pass  thro'  France  on  your  way  to  St.  Petersburg,  the  dispatches 
for  our  minister  at  Paris  will  be  committed  to  your  charge.  They 
will  inform  him  of  your  destination,  leaving  to  yourself,  the  more 
particular  disclosures  which  it  may  be  useful  for  him  to  receive. 
As  the  relations  which  may  then  subsist  between  that  country 
and  Russia,  cannot  now  be  known,  it  will  rest  with  your  own  dis- 
cretion, enlightened  by  information  on  the  spot,  to  regulate  the 
degree  of  reserve  as  to  your  mission,  by  the  use  which  the  French 
government  might  be  likely  to  make  of  any  knowledge  gained  on 
the  subject.  Our  minister  in  London  will  also  be  made  acquainted 
with  your  mission,  and  instructed  to  observe  a  like  course  with 
respect  to  the  British  government. 

You  will  find  at  St.  Petersburg,  in  the  character  of  consul  of  the 
United  States  Mr.  Levett  Harris,  who  is  considered  as  standing 
well  there,  and  has  received  more  than  ordinary  marks  of  attention 
even  from  the  Emperor  himself.  I  recommend  him  to  your  regard, 
confiding  that  he  will  merit  it,  and  that  his  good  dispositions  and 
acquired  information  will  be  useful  to  you.  A  letter  which  I  have 
written  to  him  is  herewith  inclosed,  as  also  copies  of  his  late  let- 
ters to  this  Department,  and  of  certain  communications  from  the 
Russian  government  made  through  him.  I  leave  the  letter  to  be 
sealed  after  your  perusal  of  it.  In  attending  to  the  communication 
relative  to  Sweden,  you  will  of  course  restrict  yourself  to  expres- 
sions of  mere  amity  and  civility.  The  tenor  of  your  observations 
on  the  ordinance  relating  to  trade  between  Russian  and  British 
ports,  is  suggested  by  those  in  the  above  paragraph. 

The  President  will  expect  from  you  the  most  exact  and  ample 
communications,  for  which  opportunities  may  be  found.  The 
cypher  with  which  you  are  furnished,  being  the  same  with  that  of 
our  minister  at  London,  you  will  be  able  to  correspond  confiden- 


328  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

tially  with  him  as  far  as  may  be  useful.  You  will  do  well  to  obtain 
at  Paris,  a  copy  of  General  Armstrong's  cypher  also,  for  the  like 
purpose.  The  advantage  of  corresponding  with  those  ministers, 
in  cyphers  known  to  this  Department,  is,  that  in  their  transmitting 
hither  information  received  from  you,  the  labor  and  delay  of 
translating  it  into  another  cypher  may  be  avoided.  I  beg  leave  to 
intimate  also  the  conveniency  of  using  always  in  your  correspond- 
ence, with  this  Department  at  least,  good  paper,  of  the  same  size, 
and  with  outward  margins  for  guarding  the  text,  and  inward  ones 
for  the  sake  of  binding  the  letters,  and  thereby  having  a  record 
free  from  the  trouble  and  the  errors  of  transcribing.  .  .  .* 

TO  ROBERT  SMITH 

BOSTON,  5  July,  1809. 
SIR: 

I  had  the  honor  yesterday  of  receiving  your  letter  of  29th 
ultimo,  inclosing  a  commission  as  minister  plenipotentiary 

1  "  I  observe  that  nothing  is  said  in  the  instructions,  either  to  Mr.  Short  or  to  me, 
respecting  the  -presents,  which  have  heretofore  been  considered  at  the  Russian  Court, 
as  indispensable,  on  the  admission  of  a  foreign  minister. 

"A  refusal  on  the  part  of  Congress  under  the  Confederation,  to  comply  with  this 
custom,  was  the  occasion  of  Mr.  Dana's  returning  home  from  St.  Petersburg,  with- 
out being  received  as  a  public  minister.  Whether  the  Russian  Court  has  in  this 
instance  determined  to  waive  an  usage,  which  I  believe  is  still  maintained  in  others, 
or  whether  there  has  been  any  understanding  between  the  two  governments  upon 
the  subject,  I  can  only  conjecture;  but  as  the  expense  of  making  such  presents  is 
not  included  in  the  number  of  those  which  I  am  authorized  to  incur,  without  specific 
and  further  authority,  I  should  have  been  happy,  were  it  possible,  to  have  received 
the  President's  directions  in  this  respect  before  my  departure."  To  the  Secretary 
of  State,  July  27,  1809.  Ms.  See  John  Adams  to  Benjamin  Rush,  January  21,  1810, 
in  Works  of  John  Adams,  IX.  626.  "Under  an  impression  that  presents  on  such 
occasions  are  not  required,  your  instructions  have  not  contemplated  such  a  state 
of  things.  If,  however,  you  should  find  that  at  the  Russian  Court  they  are  cus- 
tomary and  are  expected,  I  am  directed  by  the  President  to  inform  you  that  you 
are  to  consider  yourself  authorized  to  make  them."  Secretary  of  State  to  John  Quincy 
Adams,  October  23,  1809.  Ms. 


i8o9]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  329 

to  the  Emperor  of  Russia.  In  requesting  you,  sir,  to  offer 
to  the  President  my  respectful  acknowledgments  for  the  ex- 
pression of  his  wish  that  this  appointment  might  be  agreeable 
to  me,  I  cannot  but  add  the  request,  that  you  would  accept 
the  like  acknowledgments  to  yourself,  for  the  obliging  man- 
ner in  which  you  have  communicated  this  information. 

Considerations  of  a  powerful  nature,  arising  from  my  per- 
sonal circumstances  and  those  of  my  family,  would  at  this 
time  restrain  me  from  leaving  for  so  distant  a  region,  and  so 
incertain  a  period  of  absence,  the  land  of  my  parents  and  of 
my  children;  and  in  consulting  the  operations  of  my  own 
judgment,  a  doubt  might  perhaps  remain,  whether  any 
service  it  may  be  in  my  power  to  render  my  country  on  this 
mission,  can  outweigh  that  which  I  must  abandon  in  my 
present  relations  with  society.  Yet  a  firm  conviction,  that 
the  first  object  of  the  President's  administration  is  the  wel- 
fare of  the  whole  Union,  and  an  ardent  desire  to  contribute 
whatever  aid  I  can  give  to  a  purpose  which  has  all  the  wishes 
of  my  heart,  reconcile  me  to  the  station  where  the  regular 
authority  of  the  country  has  deemed  it  best  to  place  me, 
and  induce  my  acceptance  of  the  office.1 

From  the  situation  of  my  private  affairs,  and  of  my  con- 
nection with  the  University  in  this  neighborhood,  which 
must  now  be  dissolved,2  I  do  not  think  I  could  name  an 
earlier  day  than  the  I5th  of  August,  as  that  on  which  I  could 
leave  the  United  States.  But  from  that  time  the  period  of 

1  See  Adams,  Memoirs,  July  5,  1809. 

2  "In  taking  my  leave  of  you,  Gentlemen,  as  an  officer  of  the  institution  under 
your  direction,  I  cannot  forbear  requesting  you  to  accept  the  assurance  that, 
whether  at  home  or  abroad,  under  every  circumstance  and  situation  of  life,  I  shall 
never  cease  to  feel  the  warmest  attachment  to  the  interests  and  welfare  of  that 
seminary,  under  whose  tutelary  guidance  it  will  ever  be  my  pride  to  have  been  a 
pupil  and  an  instructor."    To  the  President,  etc.,  of  Harvard  University,  July  7,  1809. 
Ms.    The  chair  was  filled  by  Rev.  Joseph  McKean,  who  held  it  until  1818. 


330  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

my  departure  must  depend  upon  the  opportunities  of  pas- 
sage which  may  occur  directly  to  Russia,  or  at  least  to  the 
north  of  Europe. 

A  number  of  applications  which  have  already  been  made 
for  the  situation  of  my  secretary  on  this  mission  leads  me 
to  the  inquiry,  what  provision  in  this  respect  is  contemplated 
by  the  President,  and  whether  the  choice  of  a  secretary  is 
left  with  me.  I  shall  wait  your  instructions  in  this  and  other 
respects,  and  remain  in  the  mean  time  with  perfect  respect, 
sir,  etc. 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

[ROBERT  SMITH] 

BOSTON,  7  July,  1809. 
SIR: 

When  I  had  the  honor  of  writing  you  on  the  5th  instant, 
I  had  not  the  opportunity  of  obtaining  information  which 
I  have  since  received,  respecting  the  earliness  of  the  season 
when  the  navigation  of  the  Baltic  is  closed,  nor  of  knowing 
that  I  could  obtain  at  such  time  as  would  suit  my  own  con- 
venience of  departure,  during  the  continuance  of  the  regular 
season,  an  opportunity  for  a  passage  direct  to  St.  Peters- 
burg. 

Since  then,  I  have  been  informed  by  Mr.  William  Gray, 
of  this  town,  that  he  has  a  vessel  with  suitable  accommoda- 
tions, which  he  would  readily  dispatch  for  that  place,  at 
any  time  until  the  last  of  this  month.  But  that  after  that 
time,  the  navigation  becomes  too  hazardous  to  be  attempted. 

Under  these  circumstances  I  have  determined,  if  it  meets 
with  the  President's  approbation,  to  accelerate  the  period  of 
my  departure,  and  calculating  that  I  may  receive  an  answer 
to  this  by  the  2Oth  of  this  present  month,  will  be  ready  to 


1 809]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  331 

sail  by  the  25th,  if  honored  before  that  time  with  your  in- 
structions and  orders  to  that  effect.1 

I  have  engaged  to  take  with  me,  if  the  choice  be  left  to  me, 
my  nephew,  William  Steuben  Smith,2  as  my  private  secre- 
tary. I  have  received  several  applications  from  young 
gentlemen  of  the  most  respectable  character  and  connections 
to  accompany  me  under  the  protection  of  the  legation,  and 
in  the  capacity  of  secretaries,  but  with  the  expectation  of 
providing  altogether  for  their  own  expenses,  and  to  occasion 
no  charge  to  the  government.  I  have  consented  on  these 
terms  to  take  three  persons.  The  son  of  General  Smith  of 
Baltimore,3  a  son  of  Mr.  William  Gray,4  of  this  town,  and 
Mr.  Alexander  Hill  Everett,  also  of  this  town.  They  are  all 
of  them  young  men  of  perfectly  fair  characters,  all  personally 
known  to  me;  and  although  I  have  no  expectation  of  having 
much  employment  for  them  as  secretaries,  a  belief  that  their 
object  in  this  pursuit  is  highly  laudable  in  itself,  and  may  in 
its  consequences  be  useful  to  the  country,  has  induced  me 
to  promise  a  compliance  with  their  wishes,  unless  the  Presi- 
dent, or  you,  sir,  should  perceive  some  objection  to  it,  of 
which  I  am  not  aware.  I  have  thought  it,  however,  my  duty 
not  to  make  any  positive  engagement  with  them,  without 

1  On  July  24  the  Secretary  of  State  wrote  that  he  feared  Adams  would  "not  now 
be  able  to  proceed  to  any  port  in  Russia  in  a  private  vessel;"  and  on  the  3ist  in- 
formed him  that  the  frigate  Essex  had  been  ordered  to  Boston  to  take  him  and  his 
family  to  Russia,  "as  it  is  presumed  that  the  late  change  in  the  aspect  of  our  affairs 
with  Great  Britain,  or  some  other  consideration,  may  induce  you  to  prefer  going 
out  in  a  public  rather  than  a  private  ship."    This  second  letter  reached  Adams  in 
St.  Petersburg  late  in  December. 

2  Son  of  William  Stephens  Smith.    May  2,  1810,  his  commission  as  secretary  of 
legation  was  issued,  and  a  second  on  March  4,  1811. 

3  John  Spear  Smith,  son  of  Samuel  Smith.    He  sailed  in  the  Pallas  for  Christian- 
sand,  reaching  that  port  two  days  after  Adams  had  left  it,  so  he  came  to  St.  Peters- 
burg through  Sweden. 

4  Francis  Galley  Gray  (1790-1856). 


332  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

informing  you  of  the  circumstances  and  of  their  names,  and 
of  inquiring  whether  there  would  be  on  the  part  of  the  gov- 
ernment any  objection  to  this  arrangement.  I  trust  it  need 
not  be  added  that  as  their  purpose  is  to  occasion  no  expense 
to  the  government,  so  the  only  advantage  that  I  am  to  de- 
rive from  having  them  attached  to  the  legation  will  be  the 
pleasure  of  their  company,  and  such  aid  in  the  performance  of 
a  private  secretary's  duties  as  they  shall  voluntarily  give. 
I  have  the  honor,  etc. 


TO  WILLIAM  EUSTIS 

BOSTON,  1 6  July,  1809. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

I  have  received  your  favor  of  the  6th  instant,  which  I  wish 
very  much  to  answer  at  considerable  length,  but  am  obliged 
to  deny  myself  that  pleasure  in  consideration  of  your  time 
and  my  own. 

I  have  determined  to  go.  Inclining  myself,  to  the  belief, 
that  home  and  a  private  station  was  a  position  in  which  I 
could  have  served  the  country  and  aided  Mr.  Madison's 
administration,  (which  is  the  same  thing)  more  usefully 
than  upon  this  mission,  I  have  yet  acquiesced  in  the  judg- 
ment of  those  to  whom  the  Constitution  has  left  it,  and  who 
have  thought  best  to  place  me  abroad.  I  could  not  be  in- 
sensible to  the  spontaneous  and  unsolicited  token  of  the 
President's  confidence,  manifested  in  the  nomination  at  the 
commencement  of  his  administration,  nor  was  it  consistent 
with  my  sense  of  my  own  duties,  to  meet  that  confidence 
with  a  temper  of  hesitation  or  of  coolness  in  regard  to  the 
mode,  or  the  place  where,  he  conceived  I  might  be  useful  to 
the  cause. 


i8o9l  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  333 

I  shall  hope  to  have  the  pleasure  and  benefit  of  your  pri- 
vate correspondence  while  abroad.  But  you  must  let  me 
know  whether  I  can  write  to  you  or  to  anybody  else,  any- 
thing but  what  may  appear  in  the  newspapers.  I  shall  cer- 
tainly have  nothing  to  reserve  from  the  President  or  the 
Secretary  of  State,  and  if  it  is  understood  that  nothing 
is  to  be  written,  but  such  matter  as  may  be  yielded  to  a 
call  for  papers,  I  shall  conform  to  such  intention  as  well 
as  I  can. 

I  have  received  from  Mr.  Daschkoff  x  a  very  polite  letter, 
expressing  his  pleasure  at  the  mission  to  Russia,  and  pro- 
posing, if  I  conveniently  could,  to  meet  him  at  New  York 
previous  to  my  departure.  Though  it  would  have  given  me 
much  pleasure  to  have  made  an  acquaintance  with  him,  I 
had  not  time  enough  for  such  a  journey,  and  felt  myself 
obliged  to  wait  here  for  my  final  orders,  and  so  I  answered 
him. 

The  aspect  of  affairs  with  France  is  less  promising  than 
could  be  wished.  Although  we  wish  to  deal  in  fairness  and 
equal  justice  with  both  belligerents,  their  conduct  towards 
us  will  follow  the  character  of  their  own  good  or  ill  success. 
Bonaparte  appears  to  have  at  present  as  much  upon  his 
hands  as  he  needs,  and  what  he  gains  in  Germany,  he  loses,  it 
would  seem,  in  Spain  and  Portugal,  if  not  in  Italy.  He  has 
stretched  the  bowstring  till  it  cracks.  He  may  as  well  re- 
serve his  resentments  against  us,  and  I  hope  he  will  until  he 
shall  see  cause  to  forget  them.  I  am,  etc.2 

1  Andre  de  Daschkoff,  Russian  charge  d'affaires  and  consul  general  in  the  United 
States. 

2  Two  days  after  this  letter  was  written,  intelligence  was  received  at  Boston,  by 
way  of  Halifax,  that  the  British  government  had  disavowed  the  arrangement  made 
by  Mr.  Erskine  in  April,  and  that  Russia  had  declared  war  against  Austria. 


334  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

At  sea,  7  August,  1809.  Monday. 
MY  DEAR  BROTHER: 

•  •••••• 

I  expect  that  these  lectures  1  will  be  handled  without 
mercy  by  the  critics  on  both  sides  the  water.  Besides  all 
their  real  defects,  which  I  know  to  be  neither  few  nor  small, 
there  will  be  the  national  malignity  at  work  in  Great  Britain, 
and  the  political  malignity  at  work  in  America,  with  an  in- 
dustry and  sagacity  fully  proportioned  to  their  virulence. 
At  whatever  period  they  should  have  appeared,  they  never 
could  have  escaped  the  severest  ordeal.  But  I  regret  that 
I  had  not  the  time  to  prepare  them  better  for  their  conflict 
with  the  world. 

I  anticipate  no  benefit  to  my  own  reputation  from  them, 
but  if  anything,  the  contrary.  Yet  I  feel  an  undoubting  con- 
fidence that  they  will  do  good.  They  will  excite  the  genius, 
stimulate  the  literary  ambition,  and  improve  the  taste  of 
the  rising  generation.  They  will  probably  lead  to  something 
better  of  the  same  kind,  and  the  very  keenness  with  which 
they  will  be  assailed,  may  contribute  to  aid  the  cause  of  liter- 
ature in  America.  If  they  should  survive  the  first  fire  of 
their  allied  adversaries,  and  I  have  the  leisure  which  I 
promise  myself,  they  may  be  much  improved  in  a  future 
edition.  To  live  in  the  memory  of  mankind  by  college  lec- 
tures is  not  the  aim  of  a  very  soaring  ambition,  but  I  have 
no  reason  to  look  for  any  higher  glory  from  posterity,  and 
with  that  I  ought  to  be  content,  if  he  who  rules  the  destinies 

1  His  lectures  on  rhetoric,  delivered  at  Harvard  University,  and  now  left  with 
his  brother  for  publication.    They  appeared  in  two  volumes. 


i8o9]  J.OHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  335 

of  men  has  so  decreed.  At  least  may  he  never  suffer  me  to 
wish  for  any  other  glory,  than  that  of  doing  good. 

In  the  valedictory  part  of  my  closing  lecture,  when  I 
called  the  students  my  unfailing  friends,  and  supposed  the 
possibility  of  an  occasion  in  their  future  lives,  upon  which 
friendship  might  deem  it  prudent  to  desert  them,  I  had  a 
meaning  the  whole  of  which  they  probably  did  not  under- 
stand, but  which  others  concerned  did  understand  full  well. 
I  had  seen  the  occasion  upon  which  friendship  did  in  more 
than  one  instance  deem  it  prudent  to  desert  me.  But  I  had 
read  and  heard  something  before  about  the  stability  of  human 
friendships,  and  I  had  never  been  guilty  of  supposing  that 
human  nature  would  change  its  character  for  me.  The  com- 
pliment to  the  students  was  justly  their  due.  For  they  had 
withstood  a  most  ingenious  and  laborious  attempt  to  ruin 
me  in  their  estimation.1 

An  attempt,  the  baseness  and  the  cunning  of  which  be- 
trayed its  origin  to  me,  as  plainly  as  if  it  had  borne  its  name 
in  capitals  upon  its  front.  An  attempt  upon  their  hearts 
through  the  medium  of  their  understandings  —  sophistry 
pimping  for  envy.  But  the  crawling  passions  of  selfish 
subtlety  often  stumble  over  the  generous  feelings  of  human 
nature,  upon  which  they  found  no  calculation,  because  they 
cannot  comprehend  their  existence. 

14<In  the  mortifications  of  disappointment,  the  soothing  voice  of  the  love  of 
letters  shall  whisper  serenity  and  peace.  In  social  converse  with  the  mighty  dead  of 
ancient  days,  you  will  never  smart  under  the  galling  sensation  of  dependence  upon 
the  mighty  living  of  the  present  age;  and  in  your  struggles  with  the  world,  should  a 
crisis  ever  occur,  when  even  friendship  may  deem  it  prudent  to  desert  you;  when 
even  your  country  may  seem  ready  to  abandon  herself  and  you;  when  even  priest 
and  Levite  shall  come  and  look  on  you,  and  pass  by  on  the  other  side;  seek  refuge, 
my  unfailing  friends,  and  be  assured  you  will  find  it,  in  the  friendship  of  Laelius 
and  Scipio;  in  the  patriotism  of  Cicero,  Demosthenes  and  Burke;  as  well  as  in  the 
precepts  and  example  of  him,  whose  whole  law  is  love,  and  who  taught  us  to  remem- 
ber injuries  only  to  forgive  them."  Adams,  Lectures  on  Rhetoric  and  Oratory,  II.  396. 


336  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

Youth  is  generous,  and  although  the  majority  of  the 
students  were  made  to  believe  that  I  was  a  sort  of  devil 
incarnate  in  politics,  (about  which  I  could  not  talk  to  them,) 
yet  they  never  could  be  persuaded  to  believe,  that  I  was  the 
ignorant  impostor  in  literature,  which  in  so  many  painful 
pages  was  undertaken  to  be  proved  for  their  edification. 

The  last  two  years  of  my  life  have  indeed  brought  home  to 
my  bosom  the  good  as  well  as  the  bad  workings  of  human 
nature  in  a  multitude  of  forms,  and  they  have  all  confirmed 
me  in  the  belief,  that  the  safest  guide  for  human  conduct  is 
integrity.  I  have  inflexibly  followed  my  own  sense  of  duty, 
relying  upon  my  own  understanding.  I  have  lost  many 
friends  and  have  made  many  enemies.  Some  of  the  friends 
that  I  have  lost  are  deeply  to  be  regretted,  and  most  of  the 
enemies  that  I  have  made  are  of  the  most  inveterate  kind, 
'foes  who  once  were  friends.'3  But  on  the  other  hand, 
some  enemies  have  been  converted  into  friends,  and  many 
men,  unexpected  and  active  friends,  have  risen  around  me, 
while  the  others  were  falling  off.  But  the  students  at  col- 
lege are  not  the  only  steady  friends  that  I  have  had.  There 
are  more  than  one  further  advanced  in  life,  whose  confidence 
in  me  has  remained  unshaken  through  good  report  and  evil 
report.  Among  the  foremost  of  whom  I  will  mention  two, 
Judge  Davis  l  and  Mr.  Emerson,2  with  the  hope  that  you 
and  my  father  will  cultivate  their  friendship  in  my  absence. 
They  have  been  willing  still  to  be  considered  as  my  friends, 
at  a  time  when  neither  my  name  nor  my  character  was  in 
fashionable  repute  among  their  associates.  I  hope  I  shall  not 
forget  it. 


1  John  Davis  (1761-1847)  of  Plymouth,  United  States  District  Judge,  Massa- 
chusetts, 1801-1847. 

2  William  Emerson  (1769-1811),  father  of  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson. 


i8o9l  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  337 

TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

At  sea,  500  miles  from  you,  9  August,  1809. 

*•••••• 

On  Saturday  morning,  I  received  by  the  mail  just  before 
I  came  on  board,  a  letter  from  Mr.  Webster,1  of  New  Haven, 
requesting  me  to  procure  for  him,  if  I  can,  a  Russian  dic- 
tionary and  grammar,  with  some  other  books,  a  commission 
which  I  shall  take  pleasure  in  executing.  He  is  prosecuting 
his  plan  of  a  large  English  dictionary,  and  although  my 
sentiments  on  such  subjects  do  not  agree  entirely  with  him, 
I  wish  that  his  industry  may  meet  with  its  rewards,  and  his 
ingenuity  with  encouragement.  He  published  two  or  three 
years  since  a  letter  to  Dr.  Ramsay,  of  South  Carolina,  con- 
taining some  censures  upon  Johnson's  Dictionary,  and  some 
criticisms  on  other  writers,  which  I  thought  incorrect.2  In 
one  of  my  lectures  I  noticed  this  letter,  and  contested  several 
of  its  criticisms,  but  on  delivering  the  lectures  to  Mr.  Hilliard 
for  the  press  I  struck  out  that  passage,  requesting  him  not 
to  print  it.  I  had  not  changed  my  opinion,  but  I  thought 
it  might  have  an  appearance  of  ill-will  from  me  to  Mr. 
Webster,  which  I  certainly  did  not  feel,  and  that  it  might 
discourage  his  undertaking  more  than  it  ought.  I  am  how- 
ever much  inclined  to  have  a  copy  taken  of  the  passage 
which  I  expunged  from  the  lecture,  and  sent  to  Mr.  Webster 
himself.  For  if  he  should  profit  by  it,  as  a  man  of  sense  al- 
ways may  profit  by  friendly  censure,  it  will  be  more  useful  to 
him  and  his  work  than  any  Russian  dictionary  or  grammar. 


1  Noah  Webster. 

2  A  Letter  to  Dr.  David  Ramsay,  1807. 


338  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

TO  WILLIAM  PLUMER 

1 6  August,  1809  (written  at  sea). 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

Among  the  letters  which  I  received  a  few  days  previous 
to  my  departure  from  Boston,  and  which  the  precipitation 
with  which  I  was  obliged  to  hasten  it  prevented  me  from 
answering,  I  am  almost  ashamed  to  acknowledge,  was  your 
very  kind  favor  of  July.  I  say  ashamed  to  acknowledge  it, 
because  in  examining  rigorously  the  causes  which  occasioned 
this  omission,  I  cannot  but  say  to  myself,  and  am  sensible 
you  will  have  reason  to  think,  that  however  short  my  time 
was,  I  ought  to  have  made  an  hour  at  least,  for  the  expres- 
sions of  grateful  sensibility  to  the  obliging  attentions  of 
friendship. 

To  repair  as  much  as  remains  within  my  power  the  fault 
from  which  I  cannot  altogether  discharge  my  own  mind,  I 
take  at  least  the  earliest  opportunity  after  my  embarkation, 
to  do  what  ought  to  have  preceded  it,  and  to  assure  you  that, 
while  absent  from  our  country,  I  shall  feel  myself  highly  in- 
debted to  you  for  the  benefit  of  your  correspondence,  when- 
ever your  convenience,  and  the  opportunities  of  a  navigation 
so  restricted  as  I  am  afraid  ours  will  too  long  continue  to  be, 
may  permit.  And  in  telling  you  how  much  I  shall  prize 
your  correspondence,  independent  of  the  gratification  which 
you  will  readily  conceive  an  exile  from  his  native  land  may 
derive  from  every  token  of  remembrance  coming  from  those 
he  most  highly  values  in  it,  I  may  add,  that  the  confidence 
with  which  I  shall  receive  from  you  either  intelligence  or 
opinions,  will  be  founded  on  a  sentiment  very  deeply  rooted 
in  my  experience  and  observation,  that  you  see  more  clearly, 
and  judge  more  coolly  of  men  and  things  relating  to  our 


1809]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  339 

political  world,  than  almost  any  other  man  with  whom  it  has 
been  my  fortune  to  act  in  public  life. 

The  spirit  of  party  has  become  so  inveterate  and  so  virulent 
in  our  country,  it  has  so  totally  absorbed  the  understanding 
and  the  heart  of  almost  all  the  distinguished  men  among  us, 
that  I,  who  cannot  cease  to  consider  all  the  individuals  of 
both  parties  as  my  countrymen,  who  can  neither  approve  nor 
disapprove  in  a  lump  either  of  the  men  or  the  measures  of 
either  party,  who  see  both  sides  claiming  an  exclusive  privi- 
lege of  patriotism,  and  using  against  each  other  weapons  of 
political  warfare  which  I  never  can  handle,  cannot  but  cher- 
ish that  congenial  spirit,  which  has  always  preserved  itself 
pure  from  the  infectious  vapors  of  faction,  which  considers 
temperance  as  one  of  the  first  political  duties,  and  which 
can  perceive  a  very  distinct  shade  of  difference  between 
political  candor  and  political  hypocrisy. 

It  affords  me  constant  pleasure  to  recollect  that  the  his- 
tory of  our  country  has  fallen  into  the  hands  of  such  a  man.1 
For  as  impartiality  lies  at  the  bottom  of  all  historical  truth, 
I  have  often  been  not  without  my  apprehensions,  that  no 
true  history  of  our  times  would  appear  at  least  in  the  course 
of  our  age;  that  we  should  have  nothing  but  federal  histories, 
or  republican  histories,  New  England  histories,  or  Virginia 
histories.  We  are  indeed  not  overstocked  with  men  capable 
even  of  this,  who  have  acted  a  part  in  the  public  affairs  of 
our  nation.  But  of  men  who  unite  both  qualifications,  that 
of  having  had  a  practical  knowledge  of  our  affairs,  and  that 
of  possessing  a  mind  capable  of  impartiality  in  summing 
up  the  merits  of  our  government,  administrations,  opposi- 
tions and  people,  I  know  not  another  man  with  whom  I 
have  ever  had  the  opportunity  of  forming  an  acquaintance, 

1  The  Plumer  Papers,  in  the  Library  of  Congress,  contain  the  manuscript  of  this 
" History,"  which  was  never  completed  or  published. 


34o  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

on  the  correctness  of  whose  narrative  I  should  so  implicitly 
rely. 

Such  a  historian,  and  I  take  delight  in  the  belief,  will  be 
a  legislator  without  reading  constituents.  You  have  so  long 
meditated  on  your  plan,  and  so  much  longer  upon  the  duties 
of  man  in  society,  as  they  apply  to  the  transactions  of  your 
own  life,  that  I  am  well  assured  your  work  will  carry  a  pro- 
found political  moral  with  it.  And  I  hope,  though  upon  this 
subject  I  have  had  no  hint  from  you,  which  can  ascertain 
that  your  view  of  the  subject  is  the  same  as  mine,  but  I 
hope,  that  the  moral  of  your  history  will  be  the  indissoluble 
union  of  the  North  American  continent.1  The  plan  of  a  New 
England  combination  more  closely  cemented  than  by  the 
general  ties  of  the  federal  government,  a  combination  first  to 
rule  the  whole,  and  if  that  should  prove  impracticable,  to 
separate  from  the  rest,  has  been  so  far  matured,  and  has 
engaged  the  studies,  the  intrigues  and  the  ambitions  of  so 
many  leading  men  in  our  part  of  the  country,  that  I  think 
it  will  eventually  produce  mischievous  consequences,  unless 
seasonably  and  effectually  discountenanced,  by  men  of  more 
influence  and  of  more  comprehensive  views.  To  rise  upon 
a  division  system  is,  unfortunately,  one  of  the  most  obvious 
and  apparently  easy  courses,  which  plays  before  the  eyes  of 
individual  ambition  in  every  section  of  the  Union.  It  is 
the  natural  resource  of  all  the  small  statesmen  who,  feeling 
like  Caesar,  and  finding  that  Rome  is  too  large  an  object  for 
their  grasp,  would  strike  off  a  village  where  they  might 
aspire  to  the  first  station,  without  exposing  themselves  to 
derision.  This  has  been  the  most  powerful  operative  im- 
pulse upon  all  the  divisionists,  from  the  first  Kentucky  con- 

1  The  point  was  well  taken,  as  Plumer,  unknown  to  Adams,  was  cognizant  of  the 
plans  of  certain  federalists  in  1804  and  sympathized  with  their  aims.  Adams 
New  England  Federalism,  106,  147. 


i8o9l  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  341 

spiracy,  down  to  the  negotiations  between  Massachusetts, 
Connecticut,  and  New  Hampshire,  of  the  last  winter  and 
spring.  Considered  merely  as  a  purpose  of  ambition,  the 
great  objection  against  this  scheme  is  its  littleness.  Instead 
of  adding  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  Judah  and  Benjamin,  like 
David,  it  is  walking  in  the  ways  of  Jeroboam,  the  son  of 
Nabat,  who  made  Israel  to  sin  by  breaking  off  Samaria  from 
Jerusalem.  Looking  at  it  in  reference  to  moral  considera- 
tions, it  is  detestable,  as  it  certainly  cannot  be  accomplished 
by  open  and  honorable  means.  The  abettors  are  obliged  to 
discover  their  real  designs,  to  affect  others,  to  practice  con- 
tinual deception,  and  to  work  upon  the  basest  materials  the 
selfish  and  dissocial  passions  of  their  instruments.  Politically 
speaking,  it  is  as  injudicious,  as  it  is  contracted  and  dishon- 
orable. The  American  people  are  not  prepared  for  disunion, 
far  less  so  than  these  people  imagine.  They  will  continue  to 
resist  and  defeat  every  attempt  of  that  character,  as  they 
uniformly  have  done,  and  such  projects  will  still  terminate 
in  the  ruin  of  their  projectors.  But  the  ill  consequences  of 
this  turbulent  spirit  will  be  to  keep  the  country  in  a  state  of 
constant  agitation,  to  embitter  the  local  prejudices  of  fellow- 
citizens  against  each  other,  and  to  diminish  the  influence 
which  we  ought  to  have,  and  might  have,  in  the  general  councils 
of  the  Union. 

To  counteract  the  tendency  of  these  partial  and  foolish 
combinations,  I  know  nothing  so  likely  to  have  a  decisive 
influence  as  historical  works,  honestly  and  judiciously  ex- 
ecuted. For  if  the  doctrine  of  union  were  a  new  one,  now 
first  to  be  inculcated,  our  history  would  furnish  the  most 
decisive  arguments  in  its  favor.  It  is  no  longer  the  great 
lesson  to  be  learnt,  but  the  fundamental  maxim  to  be  con- 
firmed, and  every  species  of  influence  should  be  exerted  by 
all  genuine  American  patriots,  to  make  its  importance  more 


342  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

highly  estimated  and  more  unquestionably  established.  I 
should  have  been  glad  to  see  a  little  more  of  this  tendency  in 
Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  than  I  did  find.  For  Washing- 
ton was  emphatically  the  man  of  the  whole  Union,  and  I  see  a 
little  too  much  of  the  Virginian  in  Marshall.  Perhaps  it 
was  unavoidable,  and  perhaps  you  will  find  it  equally  im- 
possible to  avoid  disclosing  the  New  England  man.  I  have 
enough  of  that  feeling  myself  most  ardently  to  wish,  that 
the  brightest  examples  of  a  truly  liberal  and  comprehensive 
American  political  system  may  be  exhibited  by  New  England 
men. 

I  regret  that  I  could  not  have  the  pleasure  of  a  full  and  con- 
fidential personal  interview  with  you  before  my  departure. 
My  father,  I  am  sure,  will  be  happy  to  see  you  at  Quincy, 
and  to  furnish  you  any  materials  in  his  power.  He  has  been 
for  the  last  three  months  publishing  papers,  which  I  think 
will  not  be  without  their  use  to  your  undertaking. 

Adieu,  my  dear  sir,  I  write  you  this  letter  on  the  Grand 
Bank  of  Newfoundland,  after  passing  the  night  in  catching 
cod,  of  which  in  the  interval  of  a  six  hours  calm  we  have 
caught  upwards  of  sixty.  In  the  association  of  ideas  there 
is  no  very  unnatural  transition  from  cod  fishing  on  the 
Grand  Bank  to  the  history  of  the  United  States.  No  man 
will  I  trust  be  better  able  than  yourself  to  supply  the  inter- 
mediate links  in  this  singular  concatenation.  Let  me  only 
hope  it  will  appear  to  you  as  natural  a  transition,  as  that 
from  any  subject  whatsoever,  to  the  assurance  of  that  re- 
spect and  attachment  with  which  I  subscribe  myself,  etc. 


i8o9l  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  343 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
[ROBERT  SMITH] 

CHRISTIANSAND  in  Norway,  23  September,  1809. 
SIR: 

I  have  the  honor  of  informing  you,  that  I  sailed  from  Bos- 
ton the  5th  of  August  in  the  ship  Horace,  Captain  Bickford, 
and  met  with  no  interruption  in  the  progress  of  my  voyage, 
until  we  arrived  on  the  coast  of  Norway.1 

On  the  1 7th,  the  day  before  we  made  the  land,  the  ship 
was  brought  to  by  an  armed  brig  from  which  we  were  hailed 
in  English,  and  our  captain  ordered  to  let  down  his  boat,  and 
go  on  board  of  her.  This  after  an  expostulation  on  his  part, 
objecting  to  putting  out  his  boat  in  the  heavy  sea  that  ran, 
which  was  answered  only  by  a  repetition  of  the  order  and  a 
musket  ball  fired  from  the  cruiser's  forecastle  as  the  vessels 
lay  along  side,  as  near  as  they  could  be  worked  to  each  other, 
was  attempted,  and  found  impracticable.  After  reaching 
with  great  difficulty  his  own  ship  again,  Captain  Bickford 
hoisted  in  his  boat,  hailed  the  cruiser  again,  and  declared  the 
impossibility  of  getting  on  board  of  her  with  his  boat,  upon 
which  she  left  us,  without  venturing  out  her  own  boat  and 
without  showing  any  colors.  She  must  probably  have  been 
English,  as  no  other  armed  ships  of  that  force  are  upon  this 
coast. 

The  next  day,  being  the  i8th,  we  made  the  land,  and  the 
day  following  were  successively  boarded  by  two  British 
cruisers,  who  after  examining  the  papers  permitted  the  ship 
to  proceed.2  As  there  was  an  appearance  of  stormy  weather, 

1  The  incidents  of  the  voyage  are  related  in  Adams,  Memoirs. 

2  One  of  these  vessels  was  the  Rover,  Captain  McVicker. 


344  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

and  the  wind  ahead,  our  captain  concluded  to  make  a  harbor, 
and  we  came  into  that  of  Flecknoe,  about  four  miles  distant 
from  this  place.  After  we  had  a  pilot  on  board,  we  were 
boarded  by  a  small  two  mast  boat,  sent  out  from  the  gun- 
boats stationed  here,  the  lieutenant 1  of  which  manifested  a 
disposition  to  take  possession  of  the  ship.2  This  however  was 
not  done,  and  the  commanding  officer  of  all  the  gun-boats 
and  other  naval  force  in  Norway,  Fischer,  who  is  accidentally 
here  at  this  time,  and  who  has  shown  me  the  greatest  atten- 
tion and  civility,  apologized  to  me  for  the  conduct  of  his 
lieutenant. 

Not  having  a  passport,  I  was  obliged  to  exhibit  my  com- 
mission itself  to  the  commanding  officer  of  the  gun-boats, 
to  authenticate  my  character,  to  which  every  respect  cus- 
tomary among  nations  has  been  paid.  The  weather  has  de- 
tained us  here  three  days,  and  the  equinoctial  gale  is  still 
raging.  I  found  here  upwards  of  thirty  masters  of  American 

1  Kraff. 

2  To  his  brother  he  wrote  more  fully  upon  this  incident:  "The  harbor  of  Chris- 
tiansand  was  in  sight,  and  having  a  head  wind  and  an  approaching  gale,  Captain 
Bickford  concluded  to  touch  there,  procure  some  fresh  stores  and  wait  for  a  more 
favorable  wind.    After  we  had  a  pilot  on  board,  came  a  two  mast  boat,  with  a 
swivel,  a  Danish  lieutenant  and  about  twenty  men  armed  with  swords,  and  boarded 
us.    He  insisted  upon  taking  us  into  Christiansand;  upon  which  Captain  Bickford 
told  him  he  would  not  go  in  at  all;  wore  his  ship  about  and  stood  to  sea.    The  lieu- 
tenant ordered  his  men  in  the  boat  to  come  on  board;  the  Captain  ordered  his  men 
to  keep  them  off,  and  pikes  and  swords  and  axes  were  in  immediate  opposition  to 
each  other.    The  lieutenant,  finding  himself  the  weakest,  made  a  signal  to  his  men 
to  stop,  and  none  of  them  came  on  board.    The  boat  was  immediately  cast  off,  and 
as  we  were  standing  to  sea,  he  and  the  pilot  became  excessively  alarmed,  fearing 
that  we  were  disguised  English  and  would  carry  them  off.    The  captain  thereafter 
consulting  me,  concluded  still  to  go  into  harbor,  which  we  did  under  an  island  called 
Flecknoe,  about  four  miles  from  Christiansand.    The  equinoctial  gales  came  on 
and  detained  us  there  until  yesterday  afternoon,  when  we  again  made  sail,  and 
are  now  [September  24]  within  twenty  leagues  of  Elsineur,  which  place  we  hope  to 
reach  tomorrow  morning."    The  next  day  he  had  his  meeting  with  Admiral  Bertie. 


1809]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  345 

vessels  and  supercargoes,  captured  by  Danish  privateers 
between  the  months  of  April  and  August,  and  now  detained 
for  final  adjudication  in  the  admiralty  court.  More  than 
half  of  them  have  been  condemned  in  the  inferior  court, 
which  sits  at  this  place,  and  in  most  of  the  instances  of  ac- 
quittal the  captors  have  appealed  to  the  superior  court  at 
Christiania,  by  which  the  ships  are  still  detained.  All  the 
expenses  and  very  heavy  costs  are  decreed  against  every  one 
of  the  vessels,  even  when  the  decision  has  been  against  the 
capture. 

A  memorial  from  these  unfortunate  masters  and  super- 
cargoes to  the  President  of  the  United  States  was  sent  in 
July,  which  has  doubtless  before  this  time  reached  its  destin- 
ation.1 A  copy  of  it,  and  a  letter  from  them  to  me,  had  before 
my  arrival  here  been  forwarded  by  duplicates  to  me  to 
Elsineur  2  and  to  Petersburg. 

They  request  my  interposition  with  the  Danish  govern- 
ment in  their  behalf,  and  although  having  no  authority  from 
my  government  to  speak  officially  to  the  Court  of  Denmark, 
my  good  offices  may  probably  be  of  little  or  no  avail  to  them. 
I  propose,  however,  to  attempt  a  representation  in  their 
favor  at  Copenhagen.  The  grounds  upon  which  most  of  the 
sentences  of  condemnation  are  placed  would  leave  no  room 
to  doubt  the  reversal  of  them  at  the  higher  court,  should  the 
merits  of  the  respective  cases  operate  as  the  only  motives  of 
decision.  We  are  ready  to  proceed  upon  our  voyage,  and  I 
shall  put  to  sea  the  first  moment  that  wind  and  weather  will 
permit.3  I  have  the  honor,  etc. 

1  Printed  in  American  State  Papers,  Foreign  Relations,  III.  329. 

2  Helsingor,  or  Elsinore.    Adams'  spelling  is  retained. 

3  He  sailed  from  Christiansand  September  23.    "At  the  entrance  of  the  Sound  we 
found  the  passage  barred  by  two  British  armed  ships,  the  Stately,  a  64  gun  ship, 
Admiral  [Albemarle]  Bertie,  and  a  sloop  of  war  [the  Curlew}.    After  being  boarded 
by  a  boat  from  the  Admiral's  ship,  and  passing  the  third  time  through  the  ordeal  of 


346  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

TO  HANS  RODOLPH  SAABYE  l 

COPENHAGEN,  30  September,  1809. 
SIR: 

Having  received  a  commission  as  Minister  Plenipotentiary 
from  the  United  States  of  America  to  his  Imperial  Majesty 
the  Emperor  of  all  the  Russias,  and  being  upon  my  passage 
to  St.  Petersburg,  accidentally  driven  by  stress  of  weather 
into  the  harbor  of  Christiansand  in  Norway,  I  had  the 
mortification  to  find  there  upwards  of  four  hundred  of  my 
countrymen,  the  masters,  supercargoes  and  crews  of  the 
greater  part  of  thirty-six  American  vessels,  belonging  with 
their  cargoes  to  citizens  of  the  United  States,  captured  and 

examination,  we  were  informed  that  all  the  ports  of  the  island  of  Zealand  being  in 
a  state  of  rigorous  blockade,  we  could  not  be  suffered  to  pass.  I  then  went  on  board 
the  Admiral's  ship,  exhibited  to  him  my  commission,  and  informed  him  that  the 
ship  was  fitted  out  for  the  purpose  of  conveying  me  to  the  place  of  my  destination. 
I  also  observed  to  him,  that  by  the  usages  of  nations  I  understood  it  was  not  cus- 
tomary to  stop  a  public  minister  upon  his  passage.  After  some  consideration  he 
frankly  admitted  the  usage,  which  he  said  ought  to  be  respected  by  every  liberal 
nation,  and  consented  to  our  passage,  on  my  giving  him  my  word  of  honor  that  we 
would  not  commit  a  breach  of  blockade,  by  going  voluntarily  into  any  of  the  ports 
of  Zealand.  He  expressed,  however,  a  strong  apprehension  that  we  should  be 
stopped  and  detained  by  the  Danes. 

"We  passed  accordingly,  and  as  we  came  within  about  a  mile  of  Cronborg  Castle, 
were  again  boarded  by  a  Danish  gun-boat,  the  men  from  which  took  possession  of 
the  ship,  and  brought  her  to  anchor  in  the  roads.  On  information  being  sent  on 
shore,  similar  to  that  I  had  given  to  Admiral  Bertie,  the  Danes  were  all  ordered  to 
leave  the  ship,  and  our  captain  was  informed  he  might  proceed  without  interrup- 
tion. On  my  going  on  shore  the  commandant  of  the  castle  sent  an  officer  to  ask 
for  my  passport.  I  went  to  him  and  exhibited  again  to  him  my  commission,  in- 
forming him  that  I  had  no  other  passport  from  the  United  States.  With  this  he 
was  satisfied."  To  the  Secretary  of  State,  October  4,  1809.  Ms. 

Being  detained  by  head  winds  Adams  went  to  Copenhagen,  in  the  hope  of  being 
able  to  obtain  relief  for  the  American  captains  and  seamen  then  detained  by  the 
Danish  privateer  operations. 

1  United  States  consul  at  Copenhagen. 


1809]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  347 

detained  by  privateers  under  Danish  colors,  and  arrested  for 
many  months  in  that  port.  These  vessels  and  cargoes,  con- 
stituting a  mass  of  property  amounting  to  several  millions 
of  dollars,  captured  in  the  pursuit  of  their  lawful  commerce, 
and  many  of  them  belonging  to  merchants  of  the  fairest 
and  most  respectable  character,  have  not  only  been  thus  de- 
tained to  the  immense  and  almost  irreparable  detriment  of 
their  owners,  but  in  many  instances  have  been  condemned  in 
the  lower  prize  court  of  Christiansand  upon  grounds,  which 
I  am  persuaded  can  never  be  sanctioned  by  the  higher  court, 
and  in  many  other  instances  the  masters  and  crews  of  the 
vessels  have  been  subjected  to  personal  ill  treatment.1 

On  my  arrival  at  Elsineur  I  learnt  with  great  concern  that 
this  unfortunate  situation  was  not  peculiar  to  my  country- 
men in  Norway,  but  that  sixteen  other  American  vessels  had 
been  captured  under  circumstances  nearly  similar,  and  de- 
tained in  this  port  and  in  Jutland.  And  although  these  have 
been  all  liberated,  excepting  two,2  even  by  the  decision  of  the 
prize  court  in  the  first  instance,  yet  they  have  all  been  har- 
assed by  the  obligation  imposed  upon  them  to  pay  costs, 
and  in  some  cases  even  charges  to  the  captors,  and  by  the 
appeal  of  the  captors  from  the  sentences  of  the  lower  court, 
they  have  been  reduced  to  the  alternative  either  of  sacrific- 
ing large  sums  of  money  to  purchase  an  abandonment  of  the 
appeal,  or  of  submitting  to  a  detention  still  more  expensive 
and  ruinous. 

In  no  instance  whatsoever,  either  in  Norway  or  here,  have 
the  captors  been  sentenced  to  pay  damages,  or  even  sub- 
jected to  the  payment  of  costs  and  charges,  a  circumstance 
the  more  striking,  when  connected  with  the  consideration, 
that  in  some  of  the  Norway  cases  the  captors  had  not  even 

1  See  Moore,  International  Arbitrations,  V.  4549. 

2  Condemned  for  gross  and  criminal  misconduct  on  the  part  of  the  captains. 


348  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

a  legal  commission  from  his  Majesty's  government,  authoriz- 
ing to  make  the  capture. 

Although  I  have  not  the  honor  of  being  accredited  to  the 
court  of  his  Danish  Majesty,  and  can  therefore  not  be  au- 
thorized to  make  official  representations  in  behalf  of  these 
my  distressed  countrymen  in  the  name  of  my  government, 
yet,  as  there  is  no  other  minister  of  the  United  States  in  this 
vicinity,  and  as  I  have  been  an  eye  witness  of  the  unhappy 
situation  in  which  so  many  of  my  fellow-citizens  with  their 
property  is  placed,  I  have  felt  it  to  be  my  indispensable  duty 
to  make  some  exertion  in  their  behalf,  and  reposing  the  most 
perfect  confidence  in  the  justice,  benevolence  and  humanity 
of  his  Majesty,  I  have  been  persuaded  that  the  circumstances 
I  have  here  mentioned,  at  least  in  their  aggravations,  could 
not  have  been  made  known  to  him;  that  this  government 
would  on  such  an  occasion  admit  of  representations,  an- 
ticipating the  authority  which  that  of  the  United  States 
alone  can  give,  and  would  welcome  from  any  quarter  a 
statement  which  would  furnish  the  means  of  releasing  from 
distress  and  injury  so  great  a  number  of  citizens  of  a  friendly 
nation,  whose  interests  and  whose  feelings  have  ever  cordially 
sympathized  with  those  of  Denmark,  and  with  whom  a  com- 
merce entirely  beneficial  to  both  parties  had  heretofore  been 
so  happily  maintained. 

With  this  view  I  have  proceeded  to  this  place,  in  the  hope 
of  being  honored  by  an  interview  and  conference  with  his 
Excellency  the  Minister  of  State,  Count  BernstorfT,1  but 
have  had  the  disappointment  to  find  that  he  is  not  in  the  city, 
and  the  lateness  of  the  season  rendering  the  remainder  of  the 
navigation  to  St.  Petersburg  daily  more  impracticable,  makes 
it  impossible  for  me  to  wait  the  uncertain  period  of  his  return. 

I  therefore  take  the  liberty  of  requesting  you,  sir,  as  the 

1  Christian  Giinther,  count  von  Bernstorff  (1769-1835). 


1809]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  349 

officer  of  the  United  States  especially  charged  with  the  com- 
mercial interests  of  their  citizens  in  this  kingdom,  to  lay  the 
substance  of  this  representation  before  his  Excellency  Count 
Bernstorff  upon  his  return,  and  to  solicit  of  his  Excellency 
such  interposition  of  his  Majesty's  government  for  the  relief 
of  those  American  sufferers,  as  he  in  his  wisdom  shall  think 
just  and  proper. 

The  United  States,  whose  people  have  so  long  and  so  con- 
stantly been  accustomed  to  find  in  the  Danish  government 
one  of  the  greatest  and  most  ardent  defenders  of  neutral 
rights,  and  who,  in  the  name  of  Bernstorff,  for  more  than  one 
generation  have  learnt  to  revere  their  firm  and  able  sup- 
porter, may  still  further  corroborate  their  expectation  of 
complete  and  final  justice  to  their  citizens,  by  the  reference 
to  their  own  conduct  towards  the  subjects  of  his  Danish 
Majesty's  under  cases  of  some  resemblance  to  those  which 
occasion  this  letter.  During  the  period  of  partial  hostility 
between  the  United  States  and  France,  in  the  years  1798  and 
1799,  when  certain  Danish  subjects  and  property  had  been 
captured  by  American  armed  vessels,  though  under  circum- 
stances of  more  colorable  suspicion  than  many  of  those  al- 
leged by  the  Norway  prize  court  as  motives  of  condemnation, 
yet  on  final  trial  before  the  Supreme  Judicial  Court  of  the 
United  States,  not  only  complete  restitution  was  awarded  to 
those  of  Danish  subjects,  but  heavy  damages  imposed  upon 
the  captors,  the  payment  of  which  I  believe  has  in  more  than 
one  instance  been  made  by  the  United  States  themselves. 

It  has  given  me  much  satisfaction  to  be  informed  that  for 
some  time  past  the  privateers,  whose  depredations  and  out- 
rages had  occasioned  all  those  grounds  of  complaint,  have 
been  by  his  Majesty's  orders  suppressed.  It  might,  there- 
fore, be  less  necessary  to  remark,  that  their  practice  was  to 
carry  in  without  discrimination  every  American  that  they 


350  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

boarded,  without  any  examination  of  their  papers  whatso- 
ever. But  as  this  suppression  must  naturally  have  resulted 
from  the  demonstration  having  been  made  to  his  Majesty 
of  the  excesses  committed  by  these  privateers,  may  it  not 
be  urged,  as  an  additional  motive  for  a  special  interposition 
of  his  Majesty's  government,  at  least  to  accelerate  the  final 
decisions  of  the  prize  courts,  which  can  alone  stop  the  ac- 
cumulation of  loss  and  injury  to  the  Americans,  who  have 
been  detained  in  a  manner  so  little  conformable  to  the  most 
unquestioned  principles  of  neutral  right.  To  give  additional 
energy  to  this  request  as  it  regards  the  Norway  cases,  it 
may  not  be  improper  to  state,  that  the  Americans  thus  con- 
fined at  Christiansand  are  not  only  suffering  already  from  a 
scantiness  of  obtaining  the  means  of  subsistence,  but  that 
by  contributing  to  increase  the  scarcity  of  provisions,  they 
add  inevitably  to  the  wants  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  place, 
inasmuch  that  the  magistrates  have  already  thought  it  nec- 
essary to  limit  the  purchases  which  the  Americans  there  are 
allowed  to  make  for  the  supply  of  their  own  necessities. 

I  forbear,  sir,  to  recount  details  of  complaint  important 
to  individuals,  but  which,  however  they  might  be  regretted 
by  his  Majesty's  government,  it  would  be  found  difficult  to 
redress;  the  great  object  for  which  I  would  solicit  their  in- 
terposition is,  to  obtain  the  liberation  as  speedily  as  possible 
of  those  to  whom  every  day  of  detention  is  a  heavy  charge 
of  expense  and  loss,  and  who  from  the  condition  of  their 
captors,  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  in  the  last  resort 
their  only  expectation  of  indemnity  for  their  losses  and  in- 
juries, will  be  in  the  justice  of  this  government  itself,  to 
assume  that  burden  which  the  captors  have  as  little  the 
ability  as  the  will  to  discharge.  I  have  the  honor,  etc.1 

1  Saabye  was  not  only  a  Danish  subject,  but  he  was  a  member  of  the  commercial 
house  of  Ryberg,  which  had  some  interest  in  the  privateers.    "There  are  certain 


i8o9]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  351 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  4.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  14/26  October,  1809. 
SIR: 

On  the  2 1st  instant  I  had  the  honor  of  writing  you  from 
Cronstadt,1  and  the  next  day  came  up  in  a  passage  boat 
belonging  to  the  government,  furnished  by  order  of  the 
Admiral  at  Cronstadt,  to  this  place.  Soon  after  landing  I 
called  upon  the  Consul  General  of  the  United  States,  Mr. 
Harris,  and  through  him  announced  my  arrival  to  his  Ex- 
cellency Count  RomanzofT,2  High  Chancellor  of  the  Empire. 
His  Excellency  appointed  last  evening  at  seven  o'clock  to 
receive  my  visit,  which  I  accordingly  made,  and  was  intro- 

particulars  forming  some  of  the  principal  causes  of  complaint  among  the  Americans 
detained,  which  perhaps  a  native  American  would  remonstrate  with  more  propriety 
and  more  energy  than  a  Danish  subject.  Among  these  are  some  of  the  regulations 
prescribed  by  the  Danish  law  for  the  regulation  of  privateers,  issued  in  October, 
1807,  and  which  has  laid  the  foundation  for  all  their  subsequent  depredations.  The 
constitution  of  the  inferior  prize  court  is,  also,  not  only  propitious  to  the  interests  of 
neutrals,  consisting  either  of  two  naval  officers  and  a  civil  judge,  or  of  one  naval 
officer  and  one  civil  judge,  the  voice  of  the  former  always  preponderating  in  case  of 
a  difference  of  opinion.  This  has  been  always  the  composition  of  the  prize  court  in 
Norway;  and  the  greater  part  of  the  American  vessels  and  cargoes  condemned 
there,  have  been  sentenced  under  this  casting  vote  of  the  naval  officer,  against  the 
opinion  of  his  colleague.  The  examination  of  the  captain  and  crew  of  the  captured 
vessels  is  also  conducted  in  a  manner  which  occasions  much  embarrassment,  not 
only  as  being  in  a  language  which  they  do  not  understand,  but  as  neither  they  nor 
the  owners  of  the  captured  party  are  allowed  the  benefit  of  counsel  in  the  lower 
court,  the  opportunities  of  tampering  with  the  crews,  and  even  with  the  captains, 
to  betray  the  interests  of  their  owners,  and  the  truth,  have  not  been  neglected,  and, 
I  am  sorry  to  say,  in  some  cases  not  unsuccessful."  To  the  Secretary  of  State,  Oc- 
tober 4,  1809.  Ms. 

1  He  arrived  at  Cronstadt  on  that  day. 

2  Nicholas,  count  Rioumiantzof  (1754-1826),  statesman  and  man  of  letters.    The 
English  form  of  the  name  has  been  adopted  in  these  volumes. 


352  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

duced  to  him  by  Mr.  Harris.  My  appointment  to  this  mis- 
sion was  already  known  here,  not  only  from  Mr.  Harris,  but 
by  an  official  communication  from  General  Armstrong  to 
Prince  Kurakin,  the  Russian  Ambassador  at  Paris. 

Having  mentioned  to  the  Chancellor  my  wish  to  obtain 
an  audience  of  the  Emperor,  he  said  that  he  would  take  the 
orders  of  his  Imperial  Majesty  upon  my  request  this  morning; 
that  his  Majesty  was  at  this  moment  confined  to  his  cham- 
ber by  indisposition,  but  he  would  be  out  again  in  the  course 
of  a  few  days.  In  the  meantime  he  assured  me,  that  the  in- 
formation of  this  mission  from  the  United  States  had  been 
very  agreeable  to  the  Emperor.  My  conversation  with  the 
Chancellor  on  this  occasion  was,  of  course,  short,  and  con- 
fined much  to  general  and  indifferent  topics.  It  was  how- 
ever sufficiently  long  for  him  to  manifest  the  most  amicable 
dispositions  towards  the  United  States  and  their  govern- 
ment. He  mentioned  that,  as  a  mere  matter  of  form,  it 
would  be  necessary  for  me  to  furnish  him  a  copy  of  my 
credential  letter.  Presuming  that  he  would  make  this  de- 
mand conformably  to  the  usage  in  most  of  the  European 
governments,  I  had  a  copy,  together  with  a  French  transla- 
tion of  it,  in  my  pocket  and  delivered  them  to  him. 

He  had  been  informed  of  my  having  passed  through  Copen- 
hagen on  my  way  to  this  place,  and  having  mentioned  it,  I 
took  the  occasion  to  state  to  him  the  motive  of  my  visit  to 
that  city.  He  expressed  a  strong  disapprobation  of  the 
very  extraordinary  proceedings  in  Denmark  towards  the 
commerce  of  the  United  States,  and  said  that  his  govern- 
ment had  some  strong  reasons  of  complaint  on  the  same  ac- 
count. He  observed,  that  it  was  to  be  lamented  that  a  more 
liberal  system  of  conduct  towards  neutral  navigation  could 
not  be  established  by  the  common  consent  of  all  nations, 
but  this  was  a  dream,  —  "mais  c'est  un  reve"  —  and  as 


1809]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  353 

long  as  it  was  not  universally  recognized,  it  was  not  possible 
that  it  should  be  invariably  observed  by  any  partial  com- 
bination. That  notwithstanding  the  exemplary  wisdom  and 
moderation  of  the  American  government,  they  had  found 
by  the  negotiation  with  England,  so  often  terminated  to  be- 
gin over  again,  —  "si  souvent  conclues,  pour  recommen- 
cer" —  how  difficult  it  was  to  obtain  this  security  for  our 
commerce. 

I  said  that  the  United  States  had  indeed  found  that  nego- 
tiation with  England  upon  the  subject  of  commercial  rights 
on  the  sea  was  no  easy  undertaking,  but  that  I  did  not  yet 
despair  of  seeing  the  liberal  system  established  by  the  uni- 
versal consent  of  all  nations.  That  in  the  progress  of  human 
society  it  had  not  been  found  impracticable  to  prevail  upon 
mankind  by  degrees  to  abandon  many  barbarous  usages  in 
war,  and  that  I  could  not  readily  renounce  the  hope  of  seeing 
all  mankind  become  ashamed  of  cruel  and  inhuman  customs 
upon  the  seas,  as  well  as  upon  the  land.  He  replied  that  it 
was  much  to  be  desired,  but  he  feared  the  prospect  of  this 
fortunate  state  of  things  was  yet  distant.  There  was,  how- 
ever, he  added,  this  day  the  promise  of  an  important  and 
happy  step  towards  a  general  pacification.  A  courier  had 
this  day  arrived  with  a  letter  from  the  Emperor  of  France 
to  the  Emperor  Alexander  informing  him,  that  the  terms  of 
peace  between  France  and  Austria  were  substantially  agreed 
upon,  and  that  in  all  probability  the  treaty  would  be  con- 
cluded in  a  few  days.1 

As  I  was  taking  my  leave  the  Count  apologized  for  a 
deviation  from  all  formality  to  an  opportunity,  to  express 

1  Copies  of  Napoleon's  letter  were  in  private  circulation  in  St.  Petersburg.  It 
contained  the  following  sentence:  "Les  Etats  unis  sont  au  plus  mal  avec  1'Angle- 
terre,  et  paraissent  vouloir  sincerement  et  serieusement  se  rapprocher  de  notre 
systeme." 


354  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

himself  in  terms  of  the  warmest  personal  regard  for  Mr. 
Harris.  This  gentleman  appears,  indeed,  to  have  conducted 
himself  in  a  manner  so  highly  acceptable  to  this  government, 
as  not  only  to  have  acquired  a  personal  consideration  en- 
joyed by  few  even  among  the  diplomatic  characters  ac- 
credited to  the  Emperor,  but  to  have  contributed  much  to 
the  favorable  dispositions  towards  our  country  entertained 
by  his  Imperial  Majesty. 

He  has  already  transmitted  to  you  a  copy,  officially  com- 
municated to  him  by  the  Chancellor,  of  the  treaty  of  peace 
between  Russia  and  Sweden,  a  treaty  highly  advantageous 
to  this  country,  as  it  annexes  to  its  territories  the  whole 
important  province  of  Finland,  thus  uniting  both  sides  of  the 
gulf  under  the  Russian  dominion,  and  placing  under  the  said 
subjection  one  half  the  gulf  of  Bothnia,  with  the  island  of 

O 

Aland  which  commands  its  mouth.1 

The  article  which  stipulates  the  total  exclusion  of  British 
vessels,  whether  of  war  or  commerce,  is  of  vast  importance 
to  the  ultimate  success  of  what  is  called  in  the  treaty  the 
continental  system.  The  free  admission  to  the  ports  of 
Sweden  has  substantially  given  to  the  British  the  complete 
command  of  the  Baltic,  and  a  circulation  to  the  commerce 
and  productions  of  Britain  throughout  the  north  scarcely 
inferior  to  that  of  peaceable  times.  Excluded  from  the  ports 
of  Sweden,  as  they  already  were  from  all  others  within  the 
Baltic,  they  will  find  it  difficult  to  maintain  a  naval  force  in 
that  sea,  which  more  than  all  others  requires  for  fleets  nav- 
igating within  its  compass  harbors  of  refuge  from  its  storms, 
I  have  the  honor,  etc.2 

1  The  Peace  of  Frederikshamn,  September  17,  1809. 

2  He  was  presented  to  the  Emperor  and  Empress,  November  5,  1809.     See 
Memoirs. 


i8o9]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  355 

TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  16/24  November,  1809. 
My  last  letter  brought  our  good  ship  Horace  to  anchor  safe 
in  the  Road  of  Elsineur,  on  the  28th  of  September.  At  that 
place  we  were  detained  a  full  week  by  adverse  winds.  Hav- 
ing been  informed  upon  my  landing  there,  that  the  King  of 
Denmark  l  and  his  principal  minister,  Count  Bernstorff,  were 
both  absent  from  Copenhagen,  I  gave  up  in  the  first  instance 
the  intention  of  going  thither.  But  having  received  from 
several  masters  of  vessels  and  supercargoes  detained  there 
a  very  urgent  letter  requesting  me  to  come,  I  went  with  Mr. 
Smith  and  made  an  attempt  to  see  the  Minister,  who  was 
not  at  Copenhagen  but  at  his  country  seat  a  few  miles  dis- 
tant from  the  city.  He  was,  however,  unfortunately  absent 
from  home,  and  I  could  not  wait  for  his  return.  I  saw  how- 
ever Mr.  Saabye,  the  American  consul  at  Copenhagen,  and 
wrote  him  a  letter  containing  a  representation  in  behalf  of 
the  Americans  detained,  requesting  him  to  lay  it  before  the 
Danish  [minister],  which  he  promised  he  would  do.  It  was 
on  the  joth  of  September  that  I  went  to  Copenhagen.  The 
next  day  I  returned  to  Elsineur,  and  the  morning  after  em- 
barked again  on  board  the  ship.  We  lay  wind  bound  in 
Elsineur  Roads  until  the  morning  of  5  October,  with  the 
Danish  pilots  on  board.  One  to  carry  us  over  the  grounds, 
and  the  other  to  conduct  us  up  the  Baltic  and  the  Gulf  of 
Finland.  From  Elsineur  to  Copenhagen  the  distance  by 
water  is  about  25  of  our  miles  coastwise,  along  the  shores  of 
a  beautiful  country,  interspersed  with  villages,  country  seats 
and  palaces,  on  the  island  of  Zealand,  and  all  the  way  within 
sight  of  the  Swedish  coast,  which  though  more  remote  from 

1  Frederick  VI.  (1768-1839),  son  of  Christian  VII. 


356  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

the  eye  presents  a  variety  of  pleasant  prospects  and  one  or 
two  considerable  seaports  on  the  passage.  Nearly  about  mid- 
way, lies  a  small  island  now  belonging  to  Sweden  called 
Hveen,  formerly  the  residence  of  the  celebrated  Danish 
astronomer  Tycho  Brahe,  and  where  his  observatory  was 
situated.  I  was  told  that  the  ruins  of  the  building  were 
still  to  be  seen,  but  they  were  not  discerned  by  us.  A  few 
farm  houses  and  fishing  huts,  a  church  and  the  dwelling 
house  of  the  Swedish  nobleman  1  now  the  proprietor  of  the 
island,  were  the  substitutes  which  we  could  discover,  and 
were  obliged  to  content  ourselves  with  instead  of  the  as- 
tronomical ruins.  One  morning  while  we  were  yet  anchored 
at  Elsineur,  we  saw  a  British  ship  of  the  line  lying  anchored 
under  this  island  of  Hveen.  Soon  after  a  ship  came  down 
from  under  her  guns,  and  without  showing  any  colors  kept 
close  upon  the  Swedish  shore,  apparently  with  an  intention 
to  pass  the  Castle  without  stopping.  Five  or  six  guns  from 
the  batteries  of  Elsineur,  which  were  successively  fired  at 
her,  not  having  proved  sufficient  to  bring  her  to,  three  large 
flat-bottomed  gunboats  full  of  men  were  sent  out  after  her 
from  the  harbor,  and  notwithstanding  an  attempt  on  her 
part  to  turn  back  and  get  under  the  guns  of  the  man  of  war, 
they  took  and  brought  her  in.  The  two-decker  then  came 
down  and  anchored  abreast  of  us,  and  within  the  reach  of 
cannon  shot  but  gave  us  no  further  trouble.  The  ship  taken 
was  the  Concordia  of  New  York.2  For  the  attempt  to  pass 
the  Castle  she  was  detained  and  sent  to  Copenhagen,  since 
which  I  have  not  heard  what  has  been  her  fate. 

The  passage  of  the  Sound  widens  very  gradually  between 
Elsineur  and  Copenhagen.  Abreast  of  this  latter  city  lies 
a  small  island  called  Amager,  then  north  of  that  an  island 

1  Count  Tausen. 

2  Captain  David  Johnson. 


1 809]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  357 

called  Saltholm,  beyond  which  is  the  town  of  Malmo  on  the 
mainland  of  Sweden.  Between  the  islands  of  Amager  and 
Saltholm  is  a  very  narrow  passage,  through  which  ships 
bound  up  the  Baltic  are  obliged  to  pass,  with  shoal  water 
on  both  sides  of  the  passage.  This  is  called  going  over  the 
grounds.  At  the  narrowest  part  of  this  passage  two  guns, 
the  second  loaded  with  shot  fired  from  a  floating  battery  of 
three  hulks  of  men  of  war,  compelled  us  to  come  to  anchor  in 
the  middle  of  the  channel,  until  an  officer  came  on  board  and 
examined  the  ship's  papers.  After  three  other  visits  of  the 
same  kind  from  other  gunboats  and  armed  ships,  we  suc- 
ceeded in  getting  over  the  grounds  and  entered  the  Baltic  sea. 
The  6th  of  October  we  successively  came  in  sight  of  the  Is- 
lands of  Moe'n,  Riigen  and  Bornholm,  the  last  of  which  be- 
came a  memorable  island  to  us.  For  during  ten  days  and 
nights  we  were  beating  to  and  fro  in  sight  of  it,  without  ad- 
vancing so  much  as  a  league  upon  our  voyage,  a  great  part  of 
the  time  with  a  constant  succession  of  violent  squalls  of  rain, 
hail  and  snow,  flat  calms  and  strong  gales,  a  torment  of  a 
sea,  and  a  current  as  adverse  to  us  as  the  wind.  It  now  got 
to  be  the  middle  of  October.  The  captain,  who  had  been 
eleven  voyages  to  St.  Petersburg,  who  dreaded  the  Gulf  of 
Finland  more  than  the  Baltic,  and  a  harbor  closed  against 
us  by  the  ice  at  Cronstadt  still  more  than  the  Gulf  of  Fin- 
land, absolutely  despaired  of  reaching  his  destined  port 
this  winter.  The  Elsineur  pilot  who  had  been  thirty-six 
voyages  to  Petersburg  was  yet  more  despairing  than  the 
captain;  both  were  very  urgent  to  give  up  the  attempt  of 
reaching  St.  Petersburg  this  season,  and  desirous  of  putting 
back  and  going  to  Kiel  in  Holstein,  from  which  we  should 
have  had  before  us  at  this  season  of  the  year  a  journey  by 
land  of  1500  miles,  the  best  part  of  which  is  that  which  you 
know  by  experience  from  Hamburg  to  Berlin.  In  the  midst 


358  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

of  our  difficulties  the  captain  fell  sick  and  was  confined  to 
his  bed  several  days.  After  resisting,  as  long  as  the  per- 
severance of  my  spirit  would  carry  me,  the  propensity  of 
both  captain  and  pilot  to  turn  back,  I  finally  gave  up  the 
contest  on  condition  that,  if  before  we  should  reach  Kiel,  a 
favorable  change  in  the  wind  and  weather  should  occur,  we 
should  avail  ourselves  of  it  and  turn  again  towards  our  true 
destination.  I  cannot  but  reproach  myself  for  this  mo- 
mentary compliance,  as  it  indicated  a  flexibility  which  ought 
not  to  belong  to  me.  But  I  had  objects  on  board  more 
precious  to  me  than  my  own  life,  and  there  was  some  reason 
for  shrinking  from  a  risk  of  the  ship  and  cargo,  which  was 
not  mine  and  which  was  the  special  trust  of  the  captain. 
These  motives  which  were  my  only  ones  for  consenting  to 
turn  back  still  appear  to  me  strong,  but  I  ought  not  to  have 
yielded  to  them.  No  material  evil,  however,  resulted  from 
this  fault  of  mine.  The  case  upon  which  I  had  stipulated  for 
a  resumption  of  our  proper  course  occurred  within  forty- 
eight  hours  after  we  turned  back.  The  eastern  gales  sub- 
sided into  a  calm  after  we  had  retreated  from  them  about 
thirty  leagues.  They  were  soon  after  succeeded  by  western 
winds  which,  though  accompanied  with  gloomy  skies  and 
foul  weather,  brought  us  rapidly  towards  our  port.  The 
eleventh  day  after  we  had  passed  the  island  of  Bornholm, 
we  came  by  it  the  second  time  on  the  i6th  of  October. 

This  Bornholm  is  one  of  the  seven  islands  which  constitute 
the  Kingdom  of  Denmark.  The  other  six  are  Zealand, 
Fiinen  (or  rather  Fyen),  Langeland,  Lolland,  Falster  and 
Moen,  a  cluster  which  lie  contiguous  to  each  other  at  the 
entrance  of  the  Baltic.  Bornholm  is  more  distant  from  the 
rest  and  about  twenty  leagues  up  what  is  called  the  Baltic 
Sea.  Upon  our  retrograde  course  we  paid  a  visit  to  this  is- 
land, after  having  been  about  fifteen  miles  beyond  and  in 


1809]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  359 

constant  sight  of  it  for  eight  days.  It  has  no  harbor  for 
vessels  of  the  depth  of  water  which  we  drew,  but  there  are 
in  different  parts  of  the  coast  anchoring  grounds  which 
afford  shelter  from  particular  winds.  Near  one  of  its  ex- 
tremities are  two  miniature  islands  called  Christianso  and 
Friederichsholm,  between  which  is  a  narrow  channel  of  deep 
water  where  ships  in  case  of  extremity  are  sometimes  admit- 
ted and  where  they  lie  moored  to  both  the  shores.  The  width 
of  the  passage  between  these  two  islands  is  less  than  200  feet, 
and  the  islands  themselves  are  not  a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  cir- 
cumference. We  might  have  gone  in  there,  but  the  captain 
thought  the  risk  too  great.  On  the  ijth  of  October  then  we 
bore  down  upon  the  island  of  Bornholm,  and  passing  close 
under  those  of  Christianso  and  Frederichsholm,  lay  to  for 
the  night,  between  a  heavy  gale  and  a  dead  calm  under  the 
highest  land  of  Bornholm.  Saturday  morning  the  I4th  we 
hoisted  a  signal  for  a  boat  from  the  shore,  for  we  were  desti- 
tute of  many  articles  of  provisions,  and  not  overstocked  even 
with  fresh  water.  It  was  some  time  before  a  boat  came  out 
to  us,  for  they  took  us  for  a  British  armed  ship  showing  false 
colors.  However  one  boat  ventured  out.  When  they  found 
who  and  what  we  really  were,  they  reported  us  to  the  shore, 
and  during  the  remainder  of  the  day  I  had  a  succession  of 
messages  and  officers  specially  sent  from  the  governor  of  the 
island  offering  us  every  assistance  and  supply  that  it  could 
afford  with  the  most  obliging  and  urgent  invitations  to  come 
on  shore;  not  only  to  myself  but  to  the  ladies  whom  he  par- 
ticularly invited  to  a  ball  for  the  evening  of  the  next  day. 
(La  suite  ci  apres.)1 

1  See  p.  366,  infra. 


360  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

TO  SYLVANUS  BOURNE 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  28  November,   1809. 
DEAR  SIR: 

•  •*••*• 

When  we  sailed  from  Boston,  which  was  on  the  5th  of  last 
August,  the  disavowal  of  the  British  government  of  Mr. 
Erskine's  stipulations  with  ours,  was  just  known  in  the 
United  States,  but  no  measure  had  yet  been  taken  by  the 
President  in  consequence  of  it.  The  proclamation  renewing 
the  non-intercourse  with  the  British  dominions  issued  a  few 
days  after.1  The  great  change  produced  in  all  the  external 
commercial  relations  of  'the  United  States  by  this  act  will 
be  too  obvious  to  your  understanding  to  require  any  elucida- 
tion from  me.  Nor  will  it  escape  your  observation,  how  much 
the  affairs  of  our  country  may  probably  be  affected  by  two 
events,  which  have  already  occurred  in  this  hemisphere, 
since  I  landed  upon  it,  the  peace  between  Russia  and  Sweden, 
and  that  between  France  and  Austria.  What  immediate 
effect  either  or  both  of  these  important  occurrences  will  have 
upon  the  policy  of  Great  Britain  or  of  France,  in  relation  to 
commerce,  your  situation  enables  you  to  ascertain  sooner 
and  more  accurately  than  I  can  here.  The  result  of  Mr. 
Jackson's  2  intended  negotiation  in  America  is,  perhaps,  al- 
ready known  to  you,  while  we  here  have  but  within  these  two 
days  learnt  the  certainty  of  his  arrival  at  Baltimore.  The 
change  in  the  British  Ministry,  too,  though  a  circumstance 
of  less  magnitude  in  itself  than  the  others  just  noticed,  may  be 
attended  with  consequences  not  less  important  and  extensive.3 

1  August  9.    Messages  and  Papers  of  the  Presidents,  I.  473 . 

2  Francis  James  Jackson  (1770-1814). 

3  The  Portland  Ministry  came  to  an  end  in  September,  1809,  and  Spencer  Perceval 
headed  the  new  administration. 


1809]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  361 

If  your  information  and  conjectures  are  well  founded,  that 
the  persons  of  principal  influence  in  the  councils  of  princes 
have  a  direct  interest  in  maintaining  the  systems  of  restric- 
tion and  depredations  upon  American  commerce,  which 
have  characterized  for  the  last  two  or  three  years  the  meas- 
ures of  both  the  great  belligerent  powers,  it  is  much  to  be 
apprehended  that  this  unjust  and  impolitic  course  may  still 
be  persevered  in,  until  the  public  interest  shall  regain  its 
natural  and  proper  ascendancy.  By  the  letter  of  Monsieur 
de  Champagny  to  General  Armstrong,  dated  in  August 
last,1  France  has  very  precisely  and  positively  promised  to 
set  aside  those  of  her  decrees  which  have  given  us  just  cause 
of  complaint,  if  Great  Britain  will  set  aside  those  no  less 
outrageous,  upon  which  the  French  decrees  are  alleged  to 
have  been  founded.  But  while  Great  Britain  negotiates,  and 
disavows,  and  negotiates  again,  upon  points  concerning  which 
neither  the  honor  nor  interest  of  the  United  States  will  ad- 
mit of  any  compromise,  if  we  are  to  wait  for  the  repeal  of 
the  French  decrees  until  a  sound  head  shall  guide  the  councils 
of  the  British  Cabinet,  our  prospects  of  redress,  and  even  of 
the  practicable  exercise  of  our  just  rights  upon  the  ocean, 
are  remote  and  precarious  indeed.  .  .  . 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  7.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

'ST.  PETERSBURG,  4  December,  1809. 

SIR: 

I  have  the  honor  to  inclose  a  copy  of  a  note  which  I 
have  sent  to  Count  RomanzofT,  the  Chancellor  of  the  Empire 

1  August  22,  1809.    American  State  Papers,  Foreign  Relations,  III.  325. 


362  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

relating  to  two  American  vessels  l  captured,  one,  by  a  Rus- 
sian frigate,  and  the  other  by  a  privateer  under  Russian 
colors,  and  condemned  by  certain  committees  of  prizes  for 
breaches  of  blockades,  which  the  American  proprietors 
allege  did  not  exist,  or  were  at  least  unknown  to  the  masters 
of  their  vessels  when  taken.  Finding  upon  my  arrival  here 
that  Mr.  Harris  had  already  made  to  this  government  such 
representations  in  behalf  of  those  proprietors  as  their  re- 
spective cases  admitted,  I  have  thought  it  advisable  only  by 
a  note  in  general  terms  to  inform  the  Chancellor  that  I  had 
been  instructed  upon  the  subject,  and  to  intimate  the  hope 
and  expectation  that  justice  might  be  done  to  these  claims 
speedily.  With  regard  to  the  brig  Hector,  belonging  to  Mr. 
Thorndike,  there  seems  to  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  capture 
was  illegal.  The  case  of  the  vessel  belonging  to  the  Way- 
mouth  Commercial  Company  is  not  quite  so  clear,  as  it  is 
certain  that  a  blockade  of  the  port  did  exist. 

The  indulgences  which  on  the  continent  of  Europe  have 
been  allowed  to  Americans  by  way  of  exception  to  the  gen- 
eral system  of  commercial  restriction  have  been  so  consid- 
erable, that  British  commercial  speculators  have  resorted  to 
the  art  of  personating  Americans  and  of  using  forged  papers 
to  obtain  the  participation  of  these  privileges.  A  very  few 
days  after  my  arrival  here  Mr.  Harris  presented  me  a  pass- 
port, purporting  to  bear  the  signature  of  the  present  mayor 
of  New  York,  in  favor  of  one  Archibald  John  Graham, 
whom  it  styled  a  native  citizen  of  the  United  States.  It  was 
dated  the  jrd  of  January  of  the  present  year,  and  had  been 
endorsed  at  the  mayoralty  of  the  city  of  Narennes,  the  2nd 
of  March.  With  this  paper,  Mr.  Harris  presented  me  a 
letter  from  a  merchant 2  who  he  assured  me  bore  a  very 

1  The  Commerce,  commanded  by  Joseph  Tirrell,  and  the  Hector,  Luke  Thorndike. 

2  Plessig,  by  name. 


i8o9]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  363 

respectable  reputation  in  this  city,  in  which  this  gentleman 
gave  me  in  the  most  explicit  terms  his  guaranty  that  Graham 
was  a  native  citizen  of  the  United  States,  and  requested  me 
to  authenticate  the  passport  by  my  signature.  At  the  same 
time,  Mr.  Harris  gave  me  notice  that  he  suspected  the 
paper  to  be  forged,  as  he  had  already  detected  one  or  two 
others  of  the  same  form  and  appearance.  I  therefore  delayed 
my  answer  to  the  respectable  merchant  of  St.  Petersburg  two 
or  three  days,  in  the  interval  of  which  came  from  Lisbon,  the 
port  where  Graham  was  waiting  for  my  authentication  of  his 
passport,  a  real  American  citizen,  who  assured  Mr.  Harris, 
that  this  Graham,  far  from  being  a  native  citizen  of  the 
United  States,  had  probably  never  set  his  foot  in  America, 
that  he  was  a  Scotchman  by  birth,  and  had  come  to  Lisbon 
with  a  vessel  under  Pappenburg  colors;  but  which  had  been 
an  American  vessel,  which  had  come  from  the  United  States 
by  violating  the  embargo.  I  afterwards  saw  the  same  real 
American  citizen,  myself;  who  told  me  that  this  Graham 
belonged  to  a  commercial  house  in  Liverpool  where  he  had 
a  brother,  and  from  which  he  was  accustomed  to  sail  as  a 
British  master  of  a  vessel;  that  in  all  probability  the  passport 
was  a  sheer  forgery;  and  that  not  only  such  passports,  but 
all  the  ships  papers  required  for  a  vessel  of  the  United  States 
were  made  in  London  by  a  man  of  the  name  of  Van  Sander, 
who  kept  a  shop  of  public  notoriety  for  the  sale  of  such 
documents  to  any  person  who  chose  to  pay  for  them. 

I  answered  the  respectable  merchant  of  St.  Petersburg,  and 
now  enclose  translation  of  his  letter  and  of  my  answer.  A 
day  or  two  afterwards  the  same  gentleman  wrote  to  Mr. 
Harris  expressing  his  great  mortification  at  the  issue  of  his 
application,  his  strong  apprehension  that  the  passport  would 
again  be  sent  for  my  authentication  by  the  maritime  com- 
mission, and  that  by  my  refusal  Graham's  vessel  and  cargo 


364  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

would  be  condemned.  He  also  requested  Mr.  Harris  to  pro- 
cure from  me  my  consent  to  return  him  his  letter  of  guaranty. 
This  I  declined,  assuring  him,  however,  that  I  should  make 
no  unnecessary  use  of  his  name,  which  might  expose  him  to 
inconvenience. 

A  few  days  after,  I  received  from  Count  Romanzoff  a  note, 
enclosing  the  same  passport,  mentioning  that  it  had  incurred 
the  suspicions  of  the  maritime  commission,  and  enquiring 
whether  I  could  certify  the  authenticity  of  the  signature. 
Translations  of  this  note,  and  of  my  answer,  are  also  enclosed. 
I  had  also  a  personal  interview  with  the  Chancellor,1  in 
which  I  stated  to  him  the  substance  of  the  information  I 
had  obtained,  but  in  which  I  was  still  restricted  in  the  use 
of  names,  the  American  citizen  from  whom  I  had  received  my 
information  having  been  altogether  unwilling  that  his  name 
should  be  given. 

It  was  still  barely  possible  that  Graham  might  be  a  native 
citizen  of  the  United  States,  and  the  passport  a  genuine 
paper.  I  did  not  possess  the  means  of  giving  judicial  solem- 
nity to  the  declarations  of  the  American  citizen  from  whom 
I  derived  my  information;  neither  was  his  knowledge  itself 
of  a  character  to  which  he  could  make  oath  in  judicial  form. 
As  the  man's  person  was  in  danger  at  least  of  imprisonment 
and  his  property  at  stake,  I  thought  it  necessary  to  com- 
municate with  all  proper  caution  to  Count  RomanzofT  the 
circumstances  which  had  come  to  my  knowledge,  to  give 
them  barely  as  suspicions  concerning  which  the  means  of 
ascertaining  the  truth  was  in  the  tribunals  of  the  country; 
and  to  guard  against  any  precipitancy  of  decision,  which 
might  affect  injuriously  any  unsimulated  American  citizen. 
The  Count  assured  me  that  every  just  precaution  should  be 
used  to  answer  the  ends  of  substantial  justice,  and  all  due 

1  Adams,  Memoirs,  November  15,  1809. 


1 809]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  365 

discretion  in  securing  it.  He  animadverted  with  some 
severity  on  the  British  government  for  its  countenance  of 
such  a  practice  as  forgery  by  suffering  such  a  public  traffic 
of  false  papers,  in  the  very  capital  of  the  kingdom. 

With  this  letter  I  shall  send  you  the  first  number  of  a  col- 
lection of  paragraphs  and  notices  from  the  newspapers  of 
this  continent,  which  I  propose  to  continue  and  to  forward 
from  time  to  time,  by  every  opportunity  which  may  occur, 
direct  or  indirect.  Their  object  is  to  contribute  to  the  mass 
of  your  information  from  Europe.  As  taken  from  news- 
papers, they  may  be  committed  to  any  kind  of  conveyance 
as  relating  to  public  affairs  in  general,  and  not  within  my 
particular  charge,  they  will  not  need  a  signature,  and  you 
will  probably  sometimes  receive  a  number  without  any  other 
indication  of  the  source  from  which  it  comes  than  the  hand- 
writing or  this  notice.  The  subjects  upon  which  I  shall  make 
extracts  will  be  very  various  and  perhaps  often  carry  with 
them  hardly  enough  of  interest  to  deserve  the  President's 
or  your  perusal.  The  purpose  however  will  be  to  concen- 
trate information,  which  it  may  be  useful  for  you  to  possess, 
and  though  situated  at  the  extremity  of  Europe,  requiring 
nearly  as  much  time  for  intelligence  from  the  principal  seats 
of  action  to  reach  us,  as  from  them  to  the  United  States, 
it  is  possible  that  you  may  thus  receive  even  from  hence  in- 
formation which  will  not  previously  have  reached  you  from 
elsewhere.1 

I  am,  etc. 

1  Many  of  these  "gazettes"  of  information  are  in  the  Department  of  State, 
Washington,  good  evidence  of  the  industry  of  the  minister. 

» 

''Jd^f  n>Uw  Ln~ 

.  W  /I   \ 


366  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

December  14,  1809. 

The  messages  from  the  governor  of  the  island  of  Bornholm, 
which  I  mentioned  in  my  last,  were  sent  and  received  in  the 
midst  of  an  Irish  gale  of  wind  while  we  were  stretching  to 
and  from  the  shore  of  the  island,  under  close  reefed  top-sails. 
Close  under  the  high  lands  of  the  coast,  boats  were  able  to 
come  out  to  the  ship,  but  she  could  not  lay  to  these  without 
drifting  beyond  the  length  of  the  whole  island,  and  whenever 
we  got  without  shelter  of  the  hills,  we  found  a  sea  and  a 
storm  which  the  ship  had  as  much  as  she  could  do  to  live  and 
be  wholesome.  As  night  came  on  we  could  no  longer  stretch 
in  under  the  shore.  I  had  sent  a  promise  to  the  governor 
that  if  we  should  remain  wind  bound  the  next  day,  I  would 
go  on  shore  to  pay  my  respects  to  him,  and  return  in  person 
my  thanks  for  his  civilities.  I  saw  that  if  I  should  go  on 
shore,  the  ball  would  be  unavoidable,  and  that  would  oc- 
casion our  detention  not  only  for  that  day,  but  probably  for 
a  great  part  of  the  next.  I  therefore  now  consented  to  the 
captain  and  pilot's  earnest  entreaties  to  stand  off  before  the 
wind,  and  go  to  Kiel,  unless  a  favorable  change  of  the  wind 
before  our  arrival  there  should  enable  us  again  to  face  our 
true  destination.  We  had  about  two  days  sail  to  Kiel.  But 
we  pursued  our  retrograde  course  only  about  sixty  miles;  for 
in  the  course  of  the  same  night  (Saturday,  14  October)  the 
storm  died  away.  The  next  day  we  had  a  calm,  and  the  day 
following  a  favorable  wind  for  proceeding  up  the  Baltic.  On 
the  first  appearance  of  the  change  I  summoned  the  captain  to 
his  promise,  with  which  he  immediately  though  reluctantly 
complied.  On  Monday,  the  i6th  of  October,  we  finally 
passed  the  islands  of  Bornholm  and  Christianso.  About 
twenty-five  leagues  northeast  of  these  on  the  passage  up  the 


1809]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  367 

•-• 

Baltic  lies  the  island  of  Oland,  next  to  which  about  as  much 
farther  is  that  of  Gothland,  celebrated  in  the  middle  ages  for 
its  commerce  and  the  capital  of  which,  Wisby,  is  yet  well 
known  to  all  our  lawyers  by  its  code  of  maritime  laws.  Our 
pilot  and  captain  were  anxious  to  get  a  sight  of  these  islands, 
especially  the  last,  in  order  to  get  what  they  call  a  fresh  de- 
parture. For  in  navigating  the  Baltic  the  currents  are  so 
variable  both  in  their  force  and  direction,  that  a  continual 
recurrence  to  landmarks  is  necessary  to  ascertain  where  you 
are.  The  iyth  of  October  we  had  again  a  head  wind,  and 
the  captain's  inclination  to  go  to  Kiel  returned.  To  this 
however  I  did  not  consent,  though  he  put  upon  me  the  re- 
sponsibility for  the  ship  and  cargo  by  the  consequences  of 
persisting  in  the  voyage.  Still,  more  fortunately  for  the 
ship  and  cargo  than  for  ourselves,  I  did  persist,  and  after 
about  thirty-six  hours  we  had  a  return  of  fair  wind  again. 
But  the  weather  was  thick  and  gloomy.  Four  days  in  suc- 
cession, no  observation  of  the  sun  could  be  obtained,  and 

•  •  •  • 

no  sight  not  only  of  Oland  or  Gothland,  but  even  of  Osel  or  of 
Dago,  which  last  is  the  island  at  the  entrance  of  the  Gulf  of 
Finland.  An  inspection  of  any  map  of  the  Baltic  will  show 
you  this  gauntlet  of  islands,  between  which  a  vessel  must 
wind  before  reaching  this  terrible  Gulf.  In  the  long  days  and 
mild  weather  of  summer  it  is  not  more  dangerous  than  other 
seas;  but  in  the  night  almost  total  which  reigns  after  the 
autumnal  equinox  and  the  tempestuous  weather  of  approach- 
ing winter,  it  is  formidable  indeed.  Our  anxieties  were  the 
greater  from  an  uncertainty,  whether  any  of  the  usual  lights 
were  kept  at  the  most  difficult  and  dangerous  passes.  For  a 
British  fleet  had  been  stationed  at  the  mouth  of  the  Gulf 
during  the  whole  season  of  navigation,  and  we  knew  that 
the  Russian  lights  had  in  that  interval  been  extinguished. 
About  midnight  of  the  I9th  of  October  we  were  overtaken 


368  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1809 

by  an  American  ship,  the  Ocean  of  New  York,1  bound  like 
ourselves  to  Cronstadt,  and  with  whom  from  that  time  we 
sailed  in  company.  The  2Oth,  after  having  been  all  day 
straining  every  eye  on  board  ship  for  sight  of  Dago,  we  spoke 
at  the  dusk  of  evening  with  a  small  Mecklenburg  vessel 
which  was  standing  out,  and  from  which  we  obtained  infor- 
mation that  we  had  passed  all  the  islands,  which  had  so  ob- 
stinately eluded  our  sight,  and  were  advanced  about  fifteen 
leagues  up  the  Gulf.  That  the  lights  on  the  Russian  coast 
were  all  again  lighted,  and  that  in  the  course  of  two  hours  we 
should  make  that  of  Odensholm,  which  she  had  seen  since 
noon  of  the  same  day.  At  this  intelligence  (magna  componere 
parvis),  we  felt  as  Columbus  did  at  the  sight  of  the  light 
ashore  on  his  first  voyage.  We  found  the  information  exact, 
and  made  the  light  just  as  it  had  been  told  us  we  should 
make  it.  With  a  fine  fresh  breeze  and  a  moonlight  night  we 
ascended  the  Gulf,  and  passed  five  or  six  different  lighthouses 
before  morning.  Then  came  a  sweeping  gale  at  northeast, 
which  cleared  the  skies  of  every  cloud  and  vapor,  but  kept 
us  the  whole  day  as  near  the  wind  as  possible,  and  most  of 
it  under  short  sail.  About  eight  that  evening  we  passed  the 
island  of  Hogland  lighted  by  two  fires,  which  are  kept  instead 
of  lighthouses.  This  is  perhaps  the  most  dangerous  spot  in 
the  Gulf.  Hogland  is  a  rock  rather  than  an  island,  situated 
in  the  middle  of  the  Gulf,  with  shallows  on  both  sides,  and 
the  passage  between  it  and  a  shoal  on  its  north  side  is  not 
two  miles  wide.  We  passed  it  in  a  mild  beautiful  moonlight 
evening  with  just  breeze  enough  to  carry  us  slowly  through, 
and  to  give  us  a  distinct  idea  of  what  it  is.  The  next  day, 
Sunday,  22  October,  at  noon  we  anchored  in  Cronstadt 
roads,  but  could  not  procure  a  pilot  to  carry  the  ship  that 
night  into  the  mole.  I  landed  however  that  evening  with 

1  Captain  Benjamin  Richards. 


isio]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  369 

all  the  family  excepting  Mr.  Smith,  who  remained  on  board 
expecting  to  go  in  with  the  ship  the  next  morning.  At 
Cronstadt  we  presented  ourselves  to  the  Admiral  1  of  the 
port,  who  received  and  treated  us  with  great  civility;  but 
it  was  with  the  utmost  difficulty  that  we  got  a  lodging  for 
the  night,  which  we  were  ultimately  obliged  to  take  at  the 
house  of  Mr.  Sparrow,  who  is  the  agent  for  American  vessels 
at  Cronstadt.  The  same  night  a  violent  gale  of  wind  came 
on,  which  continued  the  whole  of  the  next  day,  and  which 
made  it  impossible  either  for  the  ship  to  get  into  the  mole,  or 
to  send  a  boat  on  board  for  Mr.  Smith.  But  as  the  wind  was 
fair  for  coming  to  St.  Petersburg,  and  as  the  Admiral  oblig- 
ingly offered  us  a  government  cutter  to  bring  us  up,  we  ac- 
cepted of  the  opportunity,  and  in  about  three  hours  of  time 
accomplished  the  passage.  We  landed  on  the  quay  of  the 
river  Neva,  just  opposite  the  magnificent  equestrian  statue 
of  Peter  the  Great,  at  three  in  the  afternoon,  of  the  23rd  of 
October,  the  eightieth  day  from  that  of  our  embarkation  at 
the  wharf  in  Charlestown.  .  .  . 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

No.  8.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  3  January,   1810. 

•  •••••• 

With  his  letter  from  Stockholm,  Mr.  [J.  S.]  Smith  trans- 
mitted to  me  that  which  you  did  me  the  honor  to  write  me 
on  the  3  ist  of  July  last;  together  with  one  of  the  same  date 
from  Mr.  Graham,  and  a  special  passport  for  myself  and 
family.  These  dispatches  it  appears  arrived  at  Boston  the 
day  after  we  had  sailed.  Had  they  reached  Boston  the  day 

1  Kolokoltzof. 


370  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

before,  I  should  have  availed  myself  of  the  permission  to 
take  passage  in  the  Essex;  and  although  it  must  have  delayed 
my  departure  for  several  days,  probably  we  should  have 
accomplished  the  voyage  in  less  time  than  we  did  on  board 
the  Horace.  The  appearance  of  an  American  frigate  upon 
this  occasion  in  the  Baltic  and  Gulf  of  Finland,  would  have 
produced  an  impression  more  congenial  to  the  military  senti- 
ments of  European  nations,  and  might  perhaps  have  con- 
tributed to  increase  the  consideration  which  the  character 
of  our  country  is  acquiring.  It  would  undoubtedly  have  had 
a  more  favorable  effect,  than  the  arrival  of  a  public  minister 
in  a  merchant  vessel,  upon  the  opinions  of  a  court  addicted 
Unofficial  parade  beyond  any  other  in  Europe. 

You  will  have  seen  in  my  former  letters,  how  often  upon 
the  voyage  I  experienced  the  want  of  the  special  passport, 
and  the  occasions  upon  which  I  was  obliged  to  exhibit  my 
commission,  as  a  substitute  for  it.  My  right  of  free  passage, 
and  the  privileges  of  the  character  with  which  I  was  invested 
were  universally  respected  as  soon  as  they  were  authentically 
made  known,  but  the  evidence  was  in  more  than  one  in- 
stance required.  While  any  thing  like  the  present  condition 
of  the  European  world  shall  continue,  I  should  recommend 
that  any  future  public  minister,  coming  from  the  United 
States,  should  be  conveyed  under  the  protection  of  the  gov- 
ernment flag,  and  at  the  same  time  be  provided  with  a  special 
passport  like  that  which  you  had  the  goodness  to  have  made 
out  for  me. 

With  these  papers,  I  received  also  the  copy  of  General 
Armstrong's  cypher,  of  which  I  shall  have  immediate  occa- 
sion to  make  use. 

Since  I  had  the  honor  of  writing  you  last,  I  have  received 
a  note  from  the  Chancellor  of  the  Empire,  Count  Romanzoff, 
containing  two  questions,  relating  to  the  navigation  of  vessels 


isio]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  371 

under  our  flag.  Translations  of  this  letter,  and  of  my  answer 
are  enclosed. 

Among  the  vessels,  under  the  flag  of  the  United  States, 
which  arrived  at  Cronstadt  just  before  the  closure  of  that 
port  by  the  ice,  were  two  with  registers  of  the  London  manu- 
facture. They  have  all  the  other  papers  with  which  Amer- 
ican vessels  navigating  the  European  seas  are  usually  pro- 
vided, but  whether  these  also  are  forgeries,  or  purchases, 
Mr.  Harris  has  not  the  means  of  detecting  as  he  could  the 
register.  As  a  forgery,  this  paper  is  clumsily  executed,  al- 
though the  signatures,  the  seals,  and  the  private  marks,  are 
imitated  with  all  the  care  and  assiduity  that  English  artists 
could  bring  to  their  task.  Some  of  the  private  marks  how- 
ever have  escaped  their  vigilance.  The  seals  betray  the 
stamp  of  a  die  too  recently  engraved  and  the  printed  parts 
of  the  plate  vary  materially  from  those  of  the  genuine  regis- 
ter. Mr.  Harris  has  given  notice  to  the  Chancellor  of  this 
new  imposture,  and  the  vessels  with  their  cargoes  will  prob- 
ably be  condemned. 

In  the  extracts  from  the  Gazettes,  No.  2,  which  you  will 
find  enclosed,  are  contained  the  order  of  the  French  Em- 
peror, prohibiting  the  introduction  of  colonial  merchandize 
into  Hamburg,  by  land  or  by  water;  the  advertisment  of  the 
French  consul  at  Copenhagen  that  he  will  deliver  no  more 
certificates  of  origin  for  the  same  species  of  goods;  and  the 
order  of  the  king  of  Denmark,  establishing  a  commission 
in  the  principal  ports  of  Holstein  for  the  examination  of  all 
goods  imported  there  suspected  to  be  English.  Together 
with  this  last  order  was  issued  one  which  has  not  been  pub- 
lished, but  under  which  property  of  American  citizens  to  a 
very  large  amount  has  been  sequestered,  with  circumstances 
of  peculiar  hardship.  A  number  of  Americans  at  Hamburg, 
masters,  supercargoes  and  owners  of  these  goods,  forwarded 


372  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

an  application  to  me  for  my  interference  to  obtain  the  re- 
lease and  restitution  of  their  property.  I  accordingly  had  a 
conference  with  the  Chancellor,  Count  Romanzoff,  in  conse- 
quence of  which,  by  the  express  orders  of  his  Imperial 
Majesty,  the  Danish  minister  at  this  Court  has  been  re- 
quested to  urge  upon  his  government  the  immediate  release 
and  restitution  of  the  property  of  American  citizens,  se- 
questered by  the  recent  order  of  the  King  of  Denmark,  as 
a  measure  in  which  the  Emperor  of  Russia  takes  a  particular 
interest,  and  in  which  a  compliance  with  his  desire  will  give 
him  peculiar  satisfaction.  I  have  also  in  a  personal  inter- 
view with  the  Baron  de  Blome,  the  Danish  minister  here, 
pressed  the  same  object  upon  him  with  all  the  earnestness, 
which  the  importance  of  the  interest,  and  the  justice  of  the 
demand  would  warrant.  The  dispositions  of  the  Danish 
government  I  am  persuaded  are  good,  and  if  left  to  act  as 
their  own  inclinations  and  convictions  would  dictate,  they 
will  immediately  remove  the  sequester  upon  the  property  of 
Americans.  But  Denmark,  as  well  as  her  neighbors,  ex- 
periences the  miseries  of  weakness — doing  or  suffering. 
I  am,  etc. 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

No.  9.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  7  January,  1810. 
SIR: 

In  my  public  Letter  No.  8  I  have  mentioned  to  you  in 
general  terms,  the  result  of  an  application  which  I  made  to 
Count  Romanzoff,  requesting  the  interposition  of  the  good 
offices  of  this  government  with  that  of  Denmark,  for  the 
speedy  restoration  of  the  property  of  Americans,  sequestered 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  373 

by  a  recent  order  of  his  Danish  Majesty  in  the  ports  of  Hoi- 
stein.  It  may  be  proper  to  give  you  a  more  particular  ac- 
count of  my  conferences  with  Count  RomanzofT  upon  the 
subject,  as  they  furnished  indications  not  only  of  the  Em- 
peror's dispositions  with  regard  to  the  United  States,  but 
in  relation  to  the  general  affairs  in  Europe,  and  to  the  future 
prospects  of  a  general  peace. 

I  received  the  letter  from  the  American  masters  of  vessels, 
supercargoes,  and  owners,  of  the  sequestered  property  on 
the  24th  of  December  —  the  Emperor's  birthday;  which 
according  to  the  usage  of  the  country,  was  engrossed  entirely 
by  attendance  at  court,  morning  and  evening,  and  each  time 
for  several  hours,  although  the  Emperor  himself  was  then  at 
Moscow.  On  the  25th  I  wrote  a  note  to  Count  Romanzoff, 
requesting  a  personal  interview  with  him,  which  he  appointed 
at  7  o'clock  in  the  evening  of  the  26th.  At  that  time  I  ac- 
cordingly attended  at  the  Count's  house,  and  on  being  in- 
troduced to  his  cabinet,  found  Baron  Blome,  the  Danish 
minister,  with  him.  He  immediately  retired,  and  I  informed 
the  Count  that  I  came  at  the  request  of  a  number  of  my 
countrymen,  whose  property  had  been  arrested  in  a  very 
extraordinary  manner,  by  an  order  of  the  Danish  govern- 
ment in  the  ports  of  Holstein.  That  as  to  the  dispositions  of 
the  king  of  Denmark,  with  regard  to  English  merchandize 
or  property,  that  was  no  concern  of  mine;  but  that  a  great 
amount  of  property,  unquestionably  neutral,  direct  from 
America,  and  after  having  passed  through  the  examination, 
and  paid  the  duties  required  by  the  laws  of  Denmark,  had 
now  been  arrested  by  this  order,  taken  entirely  from  the 
hands  and  management  of  its  proprietors,  and  without  in- 
timation to  them  of  the  cause  of  such  a  violent  measure,  or 
in  what  it  was  to  issue.  Purchases  to  a  large  amount  of  the 
productions  of  this  country,  had  been  made  here  and  at 


374  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

Riga  on  the  credit  of  this  property,  and  the  regular  payment 
of  which  depended  upon  its  speedy  liberation.  As  the  sub- 
ject therefore  in  some  sort  became  interesting  to  the  govern- 
ment of  this  Empire,  I  had  requested  this  conference  with 
him,  to  state  the  circumstances  to  him  and  to  ask,  whether 
the  interposition  of  the  Emperor's  good  offices  with  the 
Danish  government  might  not  be  used,  in  any  manner, 
whether  officially  or  otherwise,  so  that  the  effect  might  be 
to  levy  this  sequester  upon  American  property  as  speedily 
as  possible.  That  being  aware  it  was  a  subject  upon  which 
in  my  character  as  accredited  to  this  Court  I  could  make  no 
formal  application,  I  had  not  thought  proper  to  address  him 
an  official  note  concerning  it;  but  relying  upon  the  good  will 
which  the  Emperor  had  so  often  manifested  towards  my 
country,  and  on  the  dispositions  equally  friendly  of  the  Count 
himself,  I  had  flattered  myself  that  by  the  exertion  of  his 
Imperial  Majesty's  influence  with  the  Danish  government, 
the  release  of  this  property  might  be  immediately  obtained, 
and  my  countrymen,  the  owners  of  it,  relieved  from  the  em- 
barrassment and  alarm  occasioned  by  its  detention. 

He  said  that  in  regard  to  the  Emperor's  dispositions  to- 
wards the  United  States,  and  though  by  his  rank,  infinitely 
distant  from  his  Imperial  Majesty,  as  far  as  he  could  speak 
of  his  own,  they  were  as  friendly  as  I  could  possibly  believe 
them.  He  personally  lamented  greatly  the  distress  under 
which  commerce  in  general,  and  with  it  that  of  the  United 
States,  was  laboring.  That  nothing  short  of  a  general 
peace  could  probably  put  an  end  to  these  embarrassments, 
and  that  this  general  peace  depended  upon  England  alone. 
He  knew  not  why  this  general  peace  should  be  made,  that  nothing 
would  be  asked  of  England;  but  on  the  contrary  she  would  be 
left  in  possession  of  what  she  had  acquired.1  Until  she  could 

1  Italics  represent  cypher. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  375 

be  reduced  to  reasonable  terms  of  peace,  it  was  impossible 
that  commerce  should  be  free  from  rigorous  restrictions, 
because  it  was  by  operating  upon  her  commerce,  that  she 
must  be  made  to  feel  her  interest  in  making  peace.  As  to 
this  particular  measure  of  Denmark,  it  was  far  from  being 
agreeable  to  him,  and  he  intimated  that  it  was  the  subject 
upon  which  he  had  just  been  conversing  with  the  Baron  de 
Blome.  He  knew  by  despatches  from  the  Russian  minister  1 
the  measure  had  given  great  dissatisfaction  to  the  Danes  them- 
selves. There  was  no  occasion  to  disguise  the  fact  it  was  not  a 
voluntary  act  on  the  part  of  the  Danish  government.  It  had  been 
exacted  by  France,  whose  force  at  their  gates  was  such  as  Den- 
mark had  no  means  of  resisting,  and  who  considered  it  as  a 
measure  merely  of  severity  against  English  commerce;  that 
France  had  suspected  Denmark  at  conniving  at  the  commerce 
with  England;  at  least  he  knew  that  M.  Champagny  had  re- 
proached them  with  it  in  very  severe  terms  and,  in  fact,  the 
whole,  or  nearly  the  whole,  of  that  trade  must  substantially 
be  viewed  as  English  commerce,  since  there  were  now  none 
but  English  colonies  which  produced  the  articles  known  by 
the  denomination  of  colonial  merchandize. 

I  assured  him  that  with  the  exception  perhaps  of  coffee,  all 
the  articles  of  colonial  trade  were  produced  within  the 
United  States;  and  with  respect  to  coffee,  as  well  as  the  rest, 
there  were  all  the  Spanish  islands  which  produced  them  in 
great  quantities.  But,  said  he,  is  not  the  produce  of  the 
United  States  in  these  articles,  of  inferior  quality?  Cotton 
for  instance?  I  told  him  the  United  States  produced  the 
best  of  cotton,  and  in  immense  quantities;  that  in  all  the 
southern  States,  as  well  as  in  Louisiana,  the  cultivation  of 
this  article  within  the  last  twenty  years  had  flourished  beyond 
imagination,  and  that  of  all  the  cotton  brought  by  the  Amer- 

1  M.  Lizakewitz  [or  Dizkewitz.] 


6  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

vessels  whose  cargoes  were  thus  sequestered  in  Holstein, 
ican  •  D 

T       js  persuaded  that  the  nine-tenths  at  least  were  the  gen- 
produce  of  the  United  States;  that  considerable  quan- 

LI  1 1 1 C 

t-.-       of  sugar  were  also  produced   in   Louisiana,   and   in 

p      gia,  which  doubtless  constituted  a  great  proportion  of 

thosr  carg°es?  and  the  rest  was  probably  the  produce  of  the 

o        ish  islands.    Certainly  very  little,  if  any,  came  from  the 

•n  •.•sh  colonies.     As  to  the  Spanish  islands,  he  said,  they 

1 1  now  not  easily  be  distinguished  from  the  British,  as 

tuev  had  declared  themselves  for  the  party  of  the  Junta, 

i  •  h  in  a  very  extraordinary  manner  had  formally  declared 

war  a8amst  Denmark. 

T  remarked  that  if,  in  consequence  of  this  declaration  of 
war   t^ie  Danish  government  thought  proper  to  prohibit  the 

•  jrtation  for  the  future  of  articles  the  produce  of  the 
c      lish  colonies,  it  was  a  measure  of  expediency  which  they 

.TO,.*  free  to  take;  but  that  it  could  never  warrant  the  seizure 
were 

of  p?0^8  a^rea<^7  imported  under  the  sanction  of  the  Danish 
laws'  wnicnJ  after  passing  through  every  examination  re- 
•  ed  by  them,  had  received  the  pledge  of  protection  due 
frorr1  ever7  civilized  government  to  private  property;  that 
jr  tuis  was  a  French  measure,  of  which  the  government  of 
•r)  mark  was  only  the  passive  instrument,  I  trusted  that  the 

•  n  lence  of  a  sovereign  so  powerful  as  the  Emperor  of  Russia, 
and  m  relati°ns  of  friendship  so  close  with  France,  would  not 
ke  exerted  without  effect  at  Paris,  and  it  would  be  immaterial 
to  tfs  wnere  tne  means  should  be  used,  if  they  produced  the 
resi^lt  of  doing  justice  to  us  and  restoring  to  my  countrymen 
their  Pr°Perty.    The  conduct  of  England  towards  my  coun- 
t      had  been  such  as  certainly  not  to  inspire  me  with  any 

rtiality  in  her  favor;  and  I  believed  the  principle  of  what 

called  the  continental  system,  that  of  bringing  England 

to  ^sPositions  for  peace  by  pressure  upon  her  commerce,  a 


isio]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  377 

good  one,  if  properly  applied;  but  I  was  surprised  that  there 
could  at  this  day  exist  any  person  who  did  not  perceive  that 
measures  which  destroyed  the  active  commerce  of  all  other 
nations,  instead  of  reducing  turned  altogether  to  the  profit 
of  that  of  England;  that  the  Emperor  Napoleon's  experiment 
had  now  been  three  years  in  operation,  and  that  in  the  midst 
of  the  most  wasteful  expenses,  of  the  grossest  internal  mis- 
management, of  the  most  unfortunate  expeditions,  in  short  of 
every  thing  that  could  baffle  the  hopes  of  the  people  of  Eng- 
land, and  exasperate  them  against  their  own  government,  no 
petitions,  no  clamors  for  peace  were  heard;  and  the  com- 
merce of  the  country,  far  from  being  diminished,  was  flour- 
ishing beyond  all  former  example.  As  a  proof  of  which  I 
referred  him  to  the  address  from  the  corporation  of  London 
to  the  king  on  the  late  jubilee,  and  to  the  king's  answer. 

The  Count  smiled,  and  said  that  as  to  addresses  to  kings  and 
their  answers,  he  believed  the  best  rule  was  to  take  all  such  boast- 
ing in  an  inverted  sense;  for  when  a  father  of  a  family  and  his 
family  are  talking  together  about  their  affairs  before  the 
world,  they  naturally  will  not  speak  of  their  distresses. 

I  replied  that  in  such  a  case  as  this  I  believed  the  conclusion 
would  be  more  consistent  with  the  fact  by  taking  the  words  in 
their  plain  and  direct  sense;  the  flourishing  or  distressed  state 
of  commerce  was  a  state  of  things  too  notorious  by  its  sim- 
plicity, too  certain  by  the  practice  of  reducing  it  all  to  precise 
figures  in  official  returns,  to  admit  of  direct  falsehoods  thus 
asserted  in  the  face  of  the  world.  That  London  was  a  city 
almost  entirely  commercial;  and  the  numerous  classes  of 
people  subsisting  upon  commerce  were  not  accustomed  to 
boast  of  profit  while  they  were  actually  suffering  distress, 
or  even  to  suffer  without  loud  complaint.  If,  at  this  time, 
any  other  king  in  Europe  were  to  receive  an  address  from  the 
principal  traders  of  his  kingdom,  they  would  not  boast  of 


378  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

the  flourishing  state  of  their  commerce;  nor  would  the  cor- 
poration of  London  have  dared  to  do  so,  if  the  fact  had  been 
strikingly  the  reverse.  It  was  not,  however,  upon  this  ad- 
dress alone  that  I  relied  as  evidence  of  the  fact.  Other  in- 
dications of  the  same  kind  were  numerous  and  decisive. 
How  indeed  could  it  be  otherwise?  The  active  commerce 
of  all  other  nations,  thanks  to  France,  and  to  France  alone, 
was  annihilated.  France  herself,  Holland,  Sweden,  Den- 
mark, had  nothing  that  could  bear  the  name  of  commerce 
left  in  their  own  ships.  The  United  States  had  scarcely  any. 
Their  intercourse  with  almost  all  Europe  was  suspended. 
Here  alone  they  were  still  freely  admitted,  and  into  those 
ports  of  Denmark,  where  this  violent  measure  must  break 
it  up  again  to  the  foundation.  The  portion  of  commerce 
carried  on  by  American  vessels  in  the  Russian  ports  was 
small.  The  number  of  vessels  was  ascertained;  and  his  Ex- 
cellency as  Minister  of  Commerce  knew  to  what  it  could 
amount.  He  also  knew  how  much  of  the  trade  was  trans- 
acted in  Russian  vessels;  and  yet  it  was  not  for  me  to  tell 
him  that  between  England  and  this  country  the  commerce  ac- 
tually carried  on  was  little  less  than  in  time  of  peace.  That  all 
articles  of  English  growth  and  manufacture  were  to  be  had 
here  as  if  the  intercourse  was  unobstructed,  only  at  heavier 
prices;  and  that  every  article  of  Russian  produce  for  which 
England  has  occasion  goes  as  plentifully  to  England  as  ever. 
He  said  the  prices  of  Russian  articles  in  England  had  recently 
risen  —  from  which  I  observed  a  further  proof  of  my  position 
might  be  derived;  for  that  the  rise  of  prices  in  England  had 
followed  as  a  consequence  upon  the  rise  of  prices  here,  which 
had  been  very  considerable.  The  inference  from  this  last 
fact  was  irresistible.  For  if  the  trade  with  England  had 
actually  been  suppressed,  the  prices  of  the  Russian  produce 
at  home  must  have  fallen  in  proportion  to  the  unavoidable 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  379 

accumulation  of  them  which  would  have  ensued.  The  com- 
merce, therefore,  was  still  carried  on  —  and  by  whom?  it 
was  not  to  be  disguised;  principally  by  the  English,  who,  by 
means  which  I  should  not  undertake  to  account  for,  did  con- 
trive to  evade  every  ordinance  and  regulation,  which  were  so 
efficacious  against  all  their  rivals  in  trade;  and  the  more 
surely  evaded  them  in  proportion  as  they  were  more  severe. 
I  had  personally  had  an  opportunity  of  observing  this  on 
my  voyage  hither.  For  in  the  Danish  dominions  the  trade 
with  England  was  forbidden  upon  pain  of  death;  and  yet  on 
going  into  a  port  of  Norway,  I  had  seen  vessels  of  that  coun- 
try, which  had  passed  through  the  British  squadrons  as  in 
time  of  profound  peace;  and  I  was  informed  from  good  au- 
thority that  there  were  then  seven  ships,  notoriously  English, 
in  the  port  of  Bergen  loading  with  timber  for  England  upon 
English  account. 

He  said  that  he  agreed  with  me  generally  in  the  reasoning, 
but  not  altogether  in  the  conclusion.  That  all  commerce 
was  to  be  considered  as  a  benefit  to  both  parties.  That  he 
had  no  faith  in  the  ordinary  doctrines  about  the  balances  of 
trade,  or  that  any  commerce  could  long  exist  unless  it  was 
profitable  on  both  sides.  If  commerce  therefore  suffered,  as 
in  the  present  condition  of  Europe  there  could  be  no  doubt 
it  did,  the  greatest  commercial  nation  in  the  end  must  suffer 
the  most.  That  although  this  crisis  had  already  continued 
longer  than  was  to  be  wished,  yet  it  would  not  be  considered 
as  a  time  sufficient  for  effecting  the  intended  result.  It  would 
be  better  that  the  whole  commerce  of  the  world  should  cease  to 
exist  for  ten  years  than  to  abandon  it  forever  to  the  control 
of  England.  That  the  effect  of  the  restrictive  system  must 
in  the  long  run  press  hardest  upon  England;  and  Mr.  Pitt, 
whose  talents  as  a  minister  must  be  acknowledged  to  have 
been  great,  was  compelled  by  the  clamors  of  the  English 


380  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

nation  arising  from  the  distress  upon  their  commerce,  to 
make  way  for  an  administration  which  made  peace.  I  ac- 
knowledged this  was  true;  but  observed  that  it  was  imput- 
able  to  a  system  of  measures  in  relation  to  commerce  directly 
opposite  to  the  present  —  a  system  which  encouraged  and 
favored  the  trade  of  the  nations  which  were  the  rivals  of 
England,  so  that  the  English  could  not  support  a  competi- 
tion with  them.  And  although  the  English  commerce  might 
partially  suffer  in  the  general  mass  with  the  rest,  it  was  much 
more  than  indemnified  by  the  part  which  it  had  acquired 
from  the  ruins  of  all  the  other  commercial  nations. 

The  Count  asked  me,  if  I  had  read  a  late  publication  of 
Mr.  d'lvernois  upon  this  subject.1  I  had  heard  of  the  book, 
but  not  seen  it.  He  said  its  representations  corresponded 
much  with  the  ideas  I  had  been  expressing;  but  in  proof  of 
his  general  position  of  the  flourishing  state  of  British  com- 
merce, he  had  specified  only  the  condition  of  Ireland.  This 
was  not  very  conclusive.  For  the  commerce  of  Ireland 
formed  a  very  small  part  of  that  of  the  United  Kingdom,  and 
when  so  great  stress  was  laid  upon  the  alleged  prosperity  of 
one  particular  branch  of  trade,  it  raised  a  strong  presumption 
that  the  actual  state  of  the  whole  afforded  no  subject  for 
exultation. 

He  concluded  by  saying  that  on  the  subject  of  my  request, 
he  would  take  the  orders  of  the  Emperor,  and  inform  me  of 
the  result;  but  as  this  was  a  measure  emanating  from  the  per- 
sonal disposition  of  the  Emperor  of  France,  he  was  apprehensive 
there  existed  no  influence  in  the  world  of  sufficient  efficacy  to 
shake  his  determination;  that  the  United  States  might  always 
rely  upon  the  inclination  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia  to  use 

1  Francois  d'lvernois  (1757-1842).  The  reference  is  probably  to  his  Effets  du 
blocus  continental  sur  le  commerce,  etc.,  des  Isles  Britanniques,  published  in  London, 
1810. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  381 

his  good  offices  in  their  favor,  and  most  especially  in  cases 
where  they  might  be  applied  with  any  prospect  of  success. 

I  left  the  Count,  with  the  impression  that  however  he 
might  personally  disapprove,  or  the  government  of  the  Em- 
peror might  dislike  the  step  which  had  thus  been  imposed 
upon  the  king  of  Denmark,  no  interference  of  Russia  was  to 
be  expected. 

On  the  same  evening,  the  Emperor  returned  from  Moscow, 
and  on  the  2Qth  I  received  a  note  from  the  Chancellor,  re- 
questing me  to  call  upon  him  at  two  o'clock  of  that  day, 
which  I  accordingly  did.  He  told  me,  that  on  the  preceding 
day,  being  the  first  since  the  Emperor's  return  upon  which 
he  had  transacted  business  with  him,  he  had  reported  to  his 
Majesty,  my  application  to  him,  requesting  the  interposition 
of  his  good  offices  with  the  Danish  government  for  the 
restoration  as  speedily  as  possible  of  the  property  of  Amer- 
icans sequestered  in  the  ports  of  Holstein;  that  he  had  in- 
formed his  Majesty  of  the  answer  which  in  his  official  char- 
acter he  had  thought  it  his  duty  to  give  me,  and  to  lead  me 
to  expect,  leaving  the  Emperor's  decision  entirely  free  ac- 
cording to  his  own  inclinations;  that  the  Emperor  had  judged 
differently  upon  the  subject  from  him.  He  had  ordered  him 
immediately  to  represent  to  the  Danish  government  his  wish 
that  the  examination  might  be  expedited,  and  the  American 
property  restored  as  soon  as  possible;  which  order  he  had 
already  executed.  He  had  sent  that  same  morning  for  the 
Baron  de  Blome,  and  had  requested  him  to  transmit  to  his 
court  these  sentiments  of  the  Emperor,  with  the  assurance 
that  his  Majesty  took  great  interest  in  obtaining  a  com- 
pliance with  them;  that  the  Emperor  not  only  took  this 
determination  without  hesitating,  but  was  gratified  in  avail- 
ing himself  of  the  opportunity  to  manifest  his  friendship  for 
the  United  States.  Perhaps  the  interest  of  his  own  subjects 


3  82  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

might  justify  his  interference  on  this  occasion:  this  was  what 
he  had  not  thought  it  necessary  to  examine.  It  was  sufficient 
for  him  that  it  would  show  the  regard  which  he  felt  for  the 
interests  of  the  United  States,  and  his  wish  to  inspire  their 
confidence  in  these  sentiments  on  his  part.  He  desired  me 
to  mention  to  Baron  de  Blome,  when  I  should  have  an  op- 
portunity to  see  him,  that  he  had  told  me  of  the  Em- 
peror's determination,  and  of  the  Count's  interview  with 
him  respecting  it.  And  he  further  observed  that  the  Baron 
had  told  him,  what  he  had  said  to  me  before,  that  it  was  a 
measure  into  which  Denmark  had  been  impelled  by  France,  and 
which  she  had  taken  with  reluctance. 

I  assured  the  Count,  that  I  should  inform  my  government 
of  this  fresh  instance  of  the  Emperor's  friendship,  and  that 
I  could  answer  by  anticipation  for  the  grateful  acknowledg- 
ment with  which  it  would  be  received.  That  on  leaving  him 
before,  I  had  felt  obliged  to  him  for  the  frank  and  candid 
manner  in  which  he  had  spoken  with  regard  to  the  object  of 
my  application;  it  was  in  my  mind  far  preferable  to  a  more 
flattering  manner,  which  might  have  led  to  hopes,  afterwards 
disappointed.  But  from  his  manner  of  considering  the  sub- 
ject at  that  time  having  entertained  little  or  no  hopes  of 
success,  I  was  now  the  more  gratified  at  finding  that  my 
countrymen  would  have  the  benefit  of  his  Majesty's  power- 
ful intercession. 

Having  on  the  same  day  an  opportunity  of  conversing 
with  the  Baron  de  Blome,  I  told  him,  according  to  Count 
Romanzoffs  desire,  that  I  had  been  informed  of  the  commu- 
nication to  him,  of  the  Emperor's  wish  for  the  restoration  of 
the  sequestered  American  property,  in  the  ports  of  Holstein. 
The  Baron  then  repeated  that  it  was  a  measure  to  which  they 
had  been  goaded  by  France;  that  it  was  still  more  injurious  to 
themselves  than  to  us;  that  this  little  trade  by  the  means  of 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  383 

American  vessels,  which  had  given  his  government  an  op- 
portunity of  laying  a  transit  duty,  was  the  only  source  of 
revenue  left  them;  but  that  in  Hamburg  they  had  been  jeal- 
ous of  it,  and  had  written  to  Paris  that  the  Danes  were 
carrying  on  a  contraband  trade  with  the  English.  Upon  this, 
France  had  loaded  them  with  bitter  reproaches,  altogether 
unmerited.  For  Denmark  had  excluded  more  rigorously 
the  English  trade  than  any  body.  Excepting  the  outskirts 
of  the  kingdom  in  Norway,  over  which  it  was  impossible  for 
the  government  to  have  an  effectual  control,  the  exclusion  of 
English  trade  had  been  complete.  Denmark  had  sacrificed 
herself  for  the  common  cause,  and  instead  of  acknowledgment 
this  was  the  return  she  had  received.  She  had  been  forced 
into  the  war  by  the  treacherous  and  unprovoked  outrages 
of  England,  and  now  she  was  obliged  to  follow  the  impulse, 
dictated  by  France. 

I  took  this  occasion  to  urge  upon  the  Baron  the  same  senti- 
ments in  relation  to  the  continental  system,  and  the  manner 
in  which  it  is  pursued,  which  I  had  before  suggested  to  Count 
RomanzofF,  —  to  insist  upon  the  absurdity  as  well  as  the 
inefficacy  of  distressing  and  ruining  the  rivals  of  Britain  in 
trade,  for  the  purpose  of  affecting  her  commerce.  I  observed 
how  ill  calculated  the  oppression  of  American  citizens,  and 
the  sequestration  of  American  property  was  to  remove  jeal- 
ousies or  suspicions  of  connivance  in  a  contraband  trade  with 
the  English,  and  how  easily  the  immense  proportion  of  the 
property  belonging  to  Americans  might  be  ascertained,  and 
liberated  from  all  pretence  of  suspicion  as  English.  That 
as  the  resentments  and  the  rigor  of  France  were  avowedly 
meant  only  to  operate  against  English  trade,  the  Danish 
government  could  release  all  property  unquestionably  Amer- 
ican without  danger  of  offending  France,  and  that  the  profits 
which  they  derived  from  this  commerce  themselves,  ought 


384  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

at  least  to  secure  to  it  all  the  favor,  which  the  government 
could  safely  bestow  upon  it. 

If  the  real  object  of  France  in  driving  the  king  of  Denmark 
into  this  measure,  as  pernicious  to  his  own  interests,  as  it  is 
contrary  to  the  rights  of  private  property,  was  merely  to 
strike  at  the  contraband  commerce  with  England,  the  inter- 
ference of  the  Emperor  of  Russia  will,  I  have  no  doubt,  be 
productive  of  immediate  and  the  most  salutary  effects.  But 
if,  under  the  cover  of  a  menacing  and  terrific  proscription  of 
English  trade,  is  concealed  either  a  trafficking  speculation  of 
powerful  individuals,  or  a  design  to  lay  hands  upon  all  the 
American  property  to  which  the  grasp  of  France  can  extend, 
the  Emperor  of  Russia  will  have  manifested  his  amicable 
disposition  towards  the  United  States,  but  its  efficacy  will 
be  paralyzed  before  it  can  reach  the  ears  of  the  Danish  court. 

There  is  an  obscure  rumor  in  circulation,  that  by  a  mutual 
agreement  between  France  and  all  the  northern  powers,  all 
commerce  in  the  articles  commonly  denominated  colonial 
merchandize  will  be  during  the  ensuing  season  interdicted 
throughout  the  continent  of  Europe.  Such  is  indeed  in  all 
probability  the  law  imposed  upon  Denmark,  upon  Sweden, 
upon  Holland,  and  upon  all  the  southern  part  of  Europe,  as 
far  as  the  power  of  France  extends.  That  instigations  of  a 
similar  nature  have  been  applied  here  is  not  improbable,  but 
as  the  independence  of  Russia  still  remains  entire,  and  as  the 
interests  of  the  Empire  would  so  deeply  suffer  by  the  attempt 
to  execute  such  a  project,  I  hope  it  will  be  withstood  with 
determination  and  success. 

This  letter,  with  my  two  last,  goes  to  Paris,  by  a  gentle- 
man, who  is  to  accompany  Count  Pahlen,  to  the  United 
States.  He  carries  I  understand  the  final  instructions  to  that 
minister,  who  is  to  proceed  upon  his  mission  as  soon  as  he 
can  procure  a  passage  from  France  to  America.  I  enclose 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  385 

it  open,  under  cover  to  General  Armstrong,  for  his  previous 
perusal. 

The  peace  between  Sweden  and  Denmark,  was  signed  at 
Jonkoping  on  the  loth  of  December.  I  am,  etc. 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

No.  10.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  17  January,  1810. 
SIR: 

The  last  letter,  which  I  had  the  honor  of  writing  you, 
was  of  the  yth  inst.  and  was  forwarded  open,  under  cover  to 
General  Armstrong,  by  a  courier  of  Count  RomanzofFs,  who 
carried  the  final  instructions  for  Count  Pahlen.  I  ought  to 
mention  it,  as  one  of  the  numerous  marks  of  attention,  which 
I  have  received  from  this  minister,  that  he  has  kindly  offered 
to  forward  any  dispatches,  that  I  may  have  occasion  to  send 
by  his  couriers,  with  the  assurance  that  he  will  give  me  sea- 
sonable notice  of  any  that  he  may  send  to  Paris. 

In  my  conferences  with  Count  Romanzoff,  and  with  the 
Baron  de  Blome  the  Danish  minister  at  this  court,  on  the 
subject  of  the  American  cargoes  sequestered  in  the  ports  of 
Holstein  by  an  order  of  the  king  of  Denmark,  you  will  have 
observed  that  it  was  considered  as  a  measure  adopted  in  con- 
sequence of  the  remonstrances  of  France;  but  that  its  object 
.was  merely  to  suppress  the  commerce  carrying  on  between 
those  ports  and  the  English.  It  seemed  however  from  their 
representations,  that  the  complaint  of  France  had  been  in 
general  terms,  but  that  the  particular  measure,  so  far  as  it 
involved  American  property,  was  the  act  of  the  Danish 
government  itself,  adopted  merely  for  the  purpose  of  exam- 
ination, to  ascertain  what  was  real,  from  that  which  was  only 
simulated  American  property.  It  occurred  to  me  that  if 


386  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

such  was  the  only  purpose  of  the  measure,  some  observations 
might  be  suggested  to  the  French  government,  which  might 
tend,  if  not  to  accelerate  the  removal  of  the  sequester,  at 
least  to  guard  against  the  interference  of  France  to  prevent 
it.  I  therefore  asked  an  interview  with  the  Duke  de  Vicence,1 
the  French  ambassador,  for  which  he  appointed  yesterday 
morning.  I  then  called  upon  him,  stated  to  him  the  par- 
ticular circumstances  of  the  case,  and  endeavored  to  turn 
his  attention,  not  only  to  the  injustice  of  this  operation,  as  it 
related  to  the  American  citizens,  whose  property  was  thus 
taken  out  of  their  hands,  but  to  the  general  impolicy  of 
measures  which  broke  up  all  distinctions  between  the  English 
and  Americans,  or  which,  still  more  at  war  with  their  pro- 
fessed purposes,  under  color  of  striking  at  the  English,  had 
their  effect  of  rigor  only  upon  the  Americans. 

The  Ambassador,  who  very  readily  admitted  the  propriety 
of  making  this  distinction  as  a  general  principle,  in  the  first 
instance  expressed  doubts,  whether  it  was  a  subject  in  which 
he  could  officially  take  any  concern.  He  observed  that  it 
was  a  measure,  either  concerted  with  that  of  his  own  govern- 
ment to  prohibit  the  introduction  of  British  merchandize 
within  the  line  of  the  French  custom  houses,  or  adopted  by 
the  king  of  Denmark  as  of  internal  regulation  within  his 
own  dominions.  That  in  the  former  of  these  suppositions,  he 
could  not  with  propriety  interfere,  to  prevent  the  full  effect 
of  measures  sanctioned  by  his  own  government,  and  in  the 
latter,  as  Denmark  was  a  sovereign  and  independent  state  it 
would  be  equally  improper  for  him  to  interpose  in  opposition 
to  any  ordinances  which  its  government  had  deemed  ex- 
pedient. 

To  this  I  replied  that  in  official  and  diplomatic  form  I  was 
well  aware  I  could  ask  nothing  of  him  in  this  case.  I  neither 

1  Armand-Augustin-Louis  de  Caulaincourt,  due  de  Vicence  (1772-1827). 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  387 

had  nor  could  have  any  instructions  from  my  own  govern- 
ment on  this  occasion;  and  knowing  that  he  was  accredited 
only  to  the  Russian  court,  and  not  to  that  of  Denmark,  I 
know  also  that  whatever  interest  he  might  take  in  the  object 
for  which  I  had  desired  to  converse  with  him,  would  arise 
from  his  personal  disposition  to  oblige,  and  not  from  any 
duty  attached  to  his  public  character.  I  supposed  that  the 
same  persons,  my  countrymen,  who  in  the  embarrassment 
and  distress  brought  upon  them  by  this  sudden  and  violent 
proceeding  had  applied  to  me  for  such  assistance  as  my  situa- 
tion might  enable  me  to  obtain  for  them,  had  also  had  re- 
course to  that  of  the  minister  of  the  United  States  in  France, 
in  which  case  he  had  doubtless  addressed  directly  to  the 
French  government  such  representations  as  the  occasion 
had  rendered  proper.  But  the  point  in  which  I  supposed  it 
possible  that  an  intimation  from  him,  the  Ambassador,  to  his 
government  might  be  of  use,  was  this:  the  Danish  govern- 
ment alleged  that  this  step  had  been  taken  at  the  desire  of 
France;  but  that  its  sole  object  was  to  suppress  an  illicit 
trade  between  its  subjects  and  the  English.  His  majesty 
the  Emperor  of  Russia,  on  a  statement  of  the  circumstances 
to  him,  had  been  pleased  to  order  a  representation  of  his 
wish  to  the  court  of  Denmark,  that  the  sequester  should 
be  removed  as  speedily  as  possible  from  the  property  really 
American  involved  in  the  sweeping  regulation  of  the  Danish 
ordinance.  If  the  wishes  of  France  were  only  pointed  against 
the  English,  a  simple  intimation  from  France  to  Denmark, 
of  her  acquiescence  in  the  immediate  liberation  of  the  prop- 
erty really  American  which  had  been  sequestered,  would  be 
sufficient,  and  it  was  the  justice  and  expediency  of  this  in- 
timation of  which  I  wished  him  to  be  convinced,  and  to  sug- 
gest to  his  government. 

These  observations  led  us  into  a  general  and  desultory 


388  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

conversation  upon  the  subject  of  the  continental  system,  of 
warfare  upon  English  commerce,  a  subject  with  the  particu- 
lars of  which  the  Ambassador  appeared  not  to  be  thoroughly 
acquainted.  From  the  tenor  of  his  conversation  I  should 
infer  that  most  if  not  all  the  negotiations  between  France  and 
Russia,  relative  to  these  objects,  are  carried  on  through  the 
channel  of  the  Russian  embassy  at  Paris.  On  this  occasion, 
as  well  as  on  those  of  my  conversations  with  Count  Roman- 
zoff,  with  the  Baron  de  Blome,  and  with  Count  Soltykoff  the 
adjunct  minister  of  foreign  affairs,  I  expressed  freely  my 
own  opinions  on  the  effect  of  the  measures  hitherto  adopted 
in  pursuance  of  the  continental  system,  referring  at  the  same 
time  to  the  striking  and  notorious  facts  from  which  this 
effect  is  discernible.  The  Ambassador  as  well  as  those  other 
ministers  appeared  personally  convinced  of  the  correctness 
of  my  remarks,  but  without  expectation  that  their  opinions 
would  prevail  to  influence  the  system  of  policy  which  will 
yet  be  pursued. 

The  Ambassador  at  the  close  of  this  conversation  assured 
me  that  he  would  make  a  report  of  it  to  his  government, 
stating  the  particular  object  for  which  I  had  applied  to  him, 
and  with  his  own  personal  wish  that  it  may  be  obtained. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  new  year,  according  to  the 
calendar  still  in  use  here,  which  was  on  Saturday  last,  some 
important  changes  in  the  subordinate  organization  of  this 
government,  were  introduced.  The  Imperial  Council  re- 
ceived a  new  modification,  the  object  of  which  is  a  greater 
stability  and  uniformity  in  the  administration  of  the  Em- 
pire. I  shall  send  you  a  translation  of  the  constitution, 
which  appeared  yesterday  in  the  Russian  and  German  lan- 
guages, but  which  the  time  will  not  allow  to  be  completed, 
by  the  present  opportunity. 

I  have  the  honor,  etc. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  389 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  II.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  31  January,  1810. 
SIR: 

•  •••••• 

On  the  2  1st  inst.  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Jonathan 
Russell  at  Tonning,  enclosing  a  dispatch  from  you,  which 
contained  your  favor  of  23rd  October,  and  a  copy  of  your 
letter  of  9  October  to  Mr.  Jackson.1  Mr.  Russell  had  sailed 
from  Boston  the  8th  of  November,  and  arrived  in  the  Roads 
below  Tonning,  the  22nd  of  December.  His  vessel  2  and 
cargo  immediately  came  under  the  new  sequestration  order 
issued  by  the  king  of  Denmark,  and  he  wrote  me  requesting 
all  such  assistance  as  might  be  in  my  power  to  give  him,  to 
obtain  their  release. 

My  late  letters  have  given  you  an  exact  account  of  my 
interviews  with  the  Chancellor  Count  RomanzofF,  with  the 
Danish  minister  Baron  de  Blome,  and  with  the  French  Am- 
bassador, on  the  subject  of  this  new  vexation  of  American 
commerce.  Since  then  I  have  seen  in  the  German  newspapers 
of  Hamburg,  a  circular  letter  of  General  Armstrong's  with  a 
letter  to  him  from  Mr.  Dreyer,  the  Danish  minister  at  Paris, 
which  seems  to  promise  that  the  sequester  upon  this  prop- 
erty shall  be  removed,  as  soon  as  the  purpose  of  examination 
to  ascertain  that  which  is  bona  fide  American  can  be  accom- 
plished. I  entertain  the  hope  that  this  promise  has  been 
duly  performed;  but  as  importunity  sometimes  contributes 
to  advance  the  claims  of  justice,  I  took  the  opportunity  of 
this  new  case  of  Mr.  Russell's,  to  write  a  letter  to  the  Baron 


1  In  American  State  Papers,  Foreign  Relations,  III.  308. 

2  President  Adams. 


390  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

de  Blome,  stating  the  particular  circumstances  of  it,  and  re- 
newing the  application  in  favor  of  all  the  other  Americans, 
whose  property  has  been  placed  in  the  same  predicament. 
This  letter  together  with  another  concerning  the  loss  of  an 
American  vessel,  in  the  passage  of  the  Belt,  by  the  firing  of 
a  Danish  battery  upon  her  just  as  she  struck  upon  a  reef,  I 
requested  the  Baron  to  communicate  to  his  court;  which  he 
assures  me  he  has  accordingly  done. 

Mr.  Forbes,  our  consul  at  Hamburg,  is  gone  to  Copen- 
hagen upon  the  same  subject.  I  have  a  letter  from  him 
written  at  Odense  in  the  island  of  Fiinen,  3  January,  in  which 
he  mentions  that  he  had  been  under  the  necessity  of  demand- 
ing the  seizure  of  three  American  vessels,  which  had  laden 
their  cargoes  in  England. 

Mr.  George  Joy  was  already  at  Copenhagen,  as  the  agent 
for  the  owners  of  some  vessels  and  cargoes  detained  in  Nor- 
way. He  had  also,  as  I  understand  from  letters  which  he 
has  written  me,  what  he  considers  as  an  official  authority  of 
a  public  nature  from  Mr.  Pinkney  the  minister  of  the  United 
States  at  London.  He  has  also  requested  an  authorization 
of  a  similar  nature  from  me;  but  having  no  authority  from 
the  government  of  the  United  States  upon  this  subject  my- 
self, I  can  delegate  none  to  any  other  person;  and  if  the 
confidence  of  the  President  in  Mr.  Joy's  character  and  quali- 
fications induces  him  to  give  a  regular  authority  to  his  rep- 
resentations, they  will  be  more  efficaciously  as  well  as  more 
properly  supported  by  credentials  from  the  United  States, 
than  by  the  assumption  of  a  power  by  me,  which  has  not 
been  entrusted  to  me.1 

The  Boston  Packet,  a  vessel  which  sailed  the  6th  of  Decem- 
ber from  Boston,  arrived  at  Tonning  the  3rd  or  4th  of  Jan- 
uary. She  brought  newspapers  containing  the  circular  letter 

1  See  Writings  of  Madison  (Hunt),  VIII.  S^n. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  391 

of  Mr.  Jackson  to  the  British  consuls  of  13  November  1  and 
also  the  President's  message  to  Congress  at  the  opening  of 
the  session.  The  personal  character  of  Mr.  Jackson  is  well 
known  to  many  persons  here,  and  the  tone  of  his  negotiations, 
not  only  in  Denmark,  but  at  Berlin,  has  been  marked  by 
such  peculiar  features,  that  the  opinion  entertained  by  the 
persons  of  the  best  information  in  the  recent  diplomatic 
transactions  in  Europe  is,  that  the  person  was  selected  for 
the  service,  and  that  his  conduct  will  be  countenanced  and 
supported  by  his  own  government.  This  opinion  is  strength- 
ened, by  the  prospects  of  Mr.  Canning's  return  into  the  Brit- 
ish ministry,  the  report  of  which  has  become  prevalent.2  The 
expectation  of  an  immediate  war  between  the  United  States 
and  England  has  given  great  alarm  not  only  to  the  Americans 
who  are  here,  but  to  all  the  commercial  part  of  this  city. 
This  however  is  not  their  only  apprehension.  On  the  one 
hand  it  is  generally  believed  that  the  Emperor  of  France, 
adhering  to  a  system  the  inefficacy  of  which  has  long  been 
demonstrated  even  to  his  most  confidential  advisers,  will 
persist  in  renewing  the  experiment  of  totally  annihilating 
the  commerce  between  the  British  Islands  and  the  continent 
of  Europe;  and  that  during  the  ensuing  season,  no  importa- 
tions will  be  allowed  into  any  ports  of  the  continent  which 
by  possibility  might  come  from  England.  On  the  other  it  is 
feared  that  the  British  government  will  at  the  opening  of 
the  spring  declare  all  the  ports  of  the  Baltic  in  a  state  of 
blockade.  Reports  of  a  general  embargo  to  be  laid  here  are 
also  in  circulation.  Much  of  all  this  is  undoubtedly  com- 
mercial speculation.  There  is  every  appearance  that  during 
the  present  year  the  shackles  and  the  oppressions  upon  com- 
merce will  be  still  greater  than  they  have  been  during  the 

1  American  State  Papers,  Foreign  Relations,  III.  323. 

2  Canning  did  not  return  to  office  until  1817. 


392  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

two  last,  and  there  is  too  much  probability  that  almost  all 
the  advantage  of  this  state  of  things,  and  far  the  smallest 
portion  of  sufferings  resulting  from  it,  will  befall  Great 
Britain. 

Proposals  for  negotiation  have  undoubtedly  been  made 
from  France  to  the  British  government;  and  it  has  been  in- 
timated to  me  that  even  a  basis  was  offered,  which  it  was 
supposed  would  be  acceptable  —  including  the  restoration 
of  Portugal,  and  of  Spain  as  far  as  the  river  Ebro,  to  their 
former  sovereigns;  provided  the  supremacy  of  France  over 
Italy,  the  part  of  Spain  within  the  Ebro,  and  the  extension  of 
the  northern  frontier  of  France  to  the  Maas,  should  be  recog- 
nized by  England.  It  is  added  however  that  these  proposals 
have  been  rejected. 

With  this  letter  I  have  the  honor  to  enclose  a  translation 
of  the  imperial  manifesto,  and  new  constitution  of  the  Coun- 
cil of  the  Russian  Empire,  issued  at  the  commencement  of 
the  present  year.  It  is  variously  considered  by  different  per- 
sons, as  a  new  system  of  government,  containing  many  fea- 
tures of  freedom  and  calculated  to  temper  the  absoluteness 
of  the  sovereign  authority;  as  an  imitation  of  the  present 
organization  of  the  French  government,  recommended  by 
the  energy  which  experience  has  shown  it  to  possess  there; 
or  as  merely  a  mode  of  removing  certain  ministers,  with 
whom  the  Emperor  is  not  altogether  satisfied,  but  whom  he 
does  not  choose  to  disgrace,  and  of  concentrating  power  and 
influence  in  the  present  Chancellor  of  the  Empire,  Count 
Romanzoff.  Upon  him  the  appointment  of  President  Gen- 
eral of  the  Council,  in  the  absence  of  the  Emperor,  has  been 
conferred  for  the  present  year.  And  the  office  next  in  dig- 
nity, that  of  Secretary  of  the  Empire,  is  at  the  same  time  be- 
stowed upon  Mr.  Speransky,1  a  person  whose  reputation  for 

1  Michel,  count  Speranski  (1772-1839). 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  393 

talents  stands  very  high,  and  who  has  risen  under  the  favor 
of  Count  Romanzoff's  particular  friendship  and  influence. 
He  is  the  reputed  author  of  several  public  manifestoes  and 
other  state  papers,  the  composition  of  which  has  excited 
notice  in  the  United  States,  as  well  as  throughout  Europe. 
I  have  the  honor,  etc. 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  8  February,  1810. 
MY  DEAR  MOTHER: 

The  Sunday  before  we  embarked  for  this  place,  my  excel- 
lent friend  and  Pastor  Emerson  delivered  in  his  pulpit  a 
discourse  upon  the  pleasing  and  not  improbable  doctrine  of  a 
guardian  angel,  which  Christians  have  often  supposed  to  be 
assigned  to  every  individual  to  watch  over  him,  and  as  far 
as  is  consistent  with  the  general  designs  of  providence,  to 
guide  his  conduct,  and  to  preserve  him  from  extraordinary 
dangers.  My  wife  and  her  sister,  who  were  present  and 
heard  this  discourse,  were  much  affected  by  it,  and  naturally 
made  an  application  of  several  passages  in  it  to  ourselves  in 
the  great  voyage  then  just  before  us.  I  was  prevented  from 
attendance  on  Mr.  Emerson's  public  ministration  that  day 
by  having  gone  out  for  the  last  time  before  our  departure  to 
spend  the  day  with  you  at  Quincy.  But  I  hope  at  some  future 
day  to  have  the  pleasure  and  benefit  of  reading  it,  and  in  the 
meantime  I  dwell  with  pleasure  upon  its  principal  idea.  The 
general  superintendence  of  the  Creator  and  Governor  of  the 
Universe  is  indeed  sufficient  for  the  preservation  and  well 
being  of  all  his  creatures,  but  in  the  greatness  and  multitude 
of  evils  and  of  perils  which  surround  a  wanderer  upon  the 
face  of  the  terraqueous  globe,  the  heart,  if  not  the  judgment, 


394  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

feels  the  want  of  some  special  protection,  of  some  intermedi- 
ate agent  possessed  of  powers  and  attributes,  superior  indeed 
to  those  of  human  nature,  but  yet  limited  in  their  extent  and 
capable  of  confinement  to  exclusive  objects. 

From  the  day  when  we  embarked  from  Mr.  Gray's  wharf 
in  Charlestown,  until  that  when  we  landed  opposite  that  of 
Peter  the  Great  at  St.  Petersburg,  we  were  exposed  to  many 
great  and  imminent  dangers.  I  have  given  a  minute  account 
of  them  all  in  several  letters  to  my  brother,  which  I  trust  will 
all  have  been  perused  by  you  before  this  will  come  to  your 
hands.  When  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  knowing  that  human 
power  was  inadequate  to  extricate  us  from  them,  there  was 
more  hope  and  consolation  in  the  belief  of  being  under  the 
peculiar  charge  of  a  superior,  though  a  finite,  spirit,  than  in 
the  philosophical  conviction,  that  all  partial  evil  is  universal 
good,  and  that  whatever  might  befall  us,  the  system  of  the 
universe  would  enjoy  an  equal  portion  of  felicity. 

A  beneficent  providence,  whether  operating  by  general 
laws  or  by  the  subordinate  energy  and  care  of  a  guardian 
angel,  did  conduct  us  safely  through  all  these  perils,  and 
brought  us  to  the  end  of  our  outward  voyage,  after  a  naviga- 
tion of  nearly  three  months  duration.  We  reached  St.  Peters- 
burg the  23rd  of  October,  the  day  before  which  I  had  written 
you  a  few  lines  from  Cronstadt,  which  I  hope  you  have  before 
this  received. 

The  American  vessels  v/hich  sailed  three  or  four  days  after- 
wards, and  by  one  of  which  that  short  letter  was  forwarded, 
was  the  last  which  could  get  away  before  the  port  was  blocked 
up  with  ice.  This  occurred  about  three  weeks  after  our  ar- 
rival, and  several  letters  which  we  had  already  sent  to 
Cronstadt,  to  go  by  vessels  ready  to  sail,  were  sent  back 
to  us,  the  vessels  having  found  it  impracticable  to  get 
out. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  395 

Since  that  time  I  have  sent  to  Holland,  France  and  Eng- 
land, dispatches  and  letters  for  America,  without  knowing 
how  or  when  they  would  find  a  conveyance.  It  is  not  im- 
probable that  this,  which  is  the  first  I  have  written  you 
from  this  place,  and  which  I  yet  know  not  how  I  shall  send, 
will  find  its  way  to  Quincy  as  soon  as  any  of  the  rest.  I 
should  have  written  you  repeatedly,  but  the  tumultuous 
agitation  of  the  life  which  we  have  led  since  our  arrival  here, 
which  has  not  yet  entirely  subsided,  has  scarcely  left  me 
time  for  the  most  indispensable  of  my  duties. 

You  are  acquainted  with  the  difficulty  and  the  expense  of 
of  forming  a  suitable  domestic  establishment  for  an  American 
minister  in  other  parts  of  Europe.  They  are  everywhere 
great.  Here  they  are  greater  than  anywhere  else.  We  are 
still  indifferently  lodged  at  a  public  house,  and  very  ex- 
pensively. A  furnished  house  or  apartments  are  not  to  be 
had.  The  bare  walls  of  a  single  floor  or  house,  which  would 
but  just  contain  my  family,  must  be  paid  at  a  rent  of  fifteen 
hundred  or  two  thousand  dollars,  that  is  six  or  seven  thou- 
sand rubles  a  year,  and  they  cannot  be  so  much  as  decently 
furnished  at  less  than  five  times  the  highest  of  these  sums. 
The  attendance  at  court  is  frequent,  and  of  the  most  indis- 
pensable obligation.  It  is  most  frequently  twice  in  a  day, 
the  morning  at  a  levee,  and  the  same  evening  at  a  ball  and 
supper.  Not  a  particle  of  the  clothing  I  brought  with  me 
have  I  been  able  to  present  myself  in,  and  the  cost  of  a  lady's 
dress  is  far  more  expensive,  and  must  be  more  diversified 
than  that  of  a  man.  The  number  of  servants  which  must 
be  kept  is  at  least  treble  that  which  is  necessary  elsewhere, 
and  the  climate  of  the  country  requires  for  every  individual 
expenses  of  clothing  unknown  in  more  southern  regions. 
These  are  burthens  from  which  no  resolution  can  escape. 
But  there  are  many  others  more  ruinous,  and  avoidable 


396  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

only  by  the  sacrifice  of  all  consideration  among  the  people 
of  the  country.  The  tone  of  society  among  us  is  almost 
universally  marked  by  an  excess  of  expenses  over  income. 
The  public  officers  all  live  far  beyond  their  salaries,  many  of 
them  are  notorious  for  never  paying  their  debts,  and  still 
more  for  preserving  the  balance  by  means  which  in  our 
country  would  be  deemed  dishonorable,  but  which  are  here 
much  less  disreputable  than  economy. 

I  will  not  dwell  upon  this  subject.  You  will  readily  con- 
ceive the  embarrassment  in  which  I  find  myself,  and  of  the 
desire  which  I  feel  to  get  out  of  a  situation  irksome  beyond 
expression.  I  have  engaged  part  of  a  house,  and  am  now  on 
the  point  of  furnishing  it.  I  shall  be  obliged  to  involve  my- 
self in  debt  and  to  draw  upon  my  little  property  in  America, 
even  to  do  this.  But  then  I  should  show  you  the  bright  side 
of  the  situation  too.  We  have  dinners,  and  balls,  and  sup- 
pers, and  ice-hill  parties,  and  masquerades,  almost  without 
end.  We  are  going,  for  instance,  this  evening  to  a  mas- 
querade ball  at  the  French  Ambassador's,  to  begin  at  ten 
o'clock.  How  much  I  am  delighted  with  all  this  is  unneces- 
sary for  me  to  say,  nor  how  congenial  it  is  to  my  temper  to 
find  extravagance  and  dissipation  become  a  public  duty.  I 
hope,  however,  and  I  have  great  pleasure  in  expressing  the 
hope  to  you,  that  not  only  myself  but  all  the  younger  part 
of  my  family  will  preserve  steadiness  of  brain  in  this  sudden 
and  violent  whirl,  to  come  out  of  it  still  in  possession  of  our 
purses  and  our  reason.  But  we  all  to  begin  with  myself  need 
the  care  of  the  guardian  angel,  more  than  we  did  in  the  Baltic 
or  the  Gulf  of  Finland. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  397 

TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  14  February,   1810. 
•  •••••  j 

Upon  the  politics  of  Europe,  or  upon  those  of  America,  I 
scarcely  know  what  to  write  you,  nor  would  it  perhaps  be 
discreet  to  write  what  would  be  most  interesting  for  you  to 
read.    Situated  here  at  the  northern  extremity  of  Europe,  we 
are  almost  as  distant  from  the  places,  where  the  events  most 
remarkable  for  the  world  are  occurring,  and  imprisoned  al- 
most constantly  from  the  time  of  our  arrival  and  still  for  six 
months,  to  be  so  in  thrilling  regions  of  thick  ribbed  ice,  we 
are  almost  as  long  in  receiving  intelligence  from  the  scene  of 
important  action  as  yourselves.    We  only  knew  very  lately, 
as  before  this  I  suppose  you  know  in  America,  that  there  is  a 
negotiation  on  foot  between  France  and  England,  but  with 
little  expectation  on  either  part  that  it  will  terminate  in  a 
peace.    Unhappily  for  mankind  the  present  state  of  the  world 
exhibits  the  singular  phenomenon  of  two  great  powers,  op- 
pressing the  whole  species  under  the  color  of  a  war  against 
each  other.     France  and  England  can  do  very  little  harm 
comparatively   speaking   to   each   other.      But   the   armed 
legions  of  France  lay  the  continent  of  Europe  under  the 
most  enormous  contributions  to  support  and  enrich  them, 
while  the  naval  force  of  England  extorts  the  same  tribute 
from  the  commerce  of  the  world.     The  mass  of  the  people 
both  in  France  and  England  suffers  in  common  with  those 
of  other  countries,  but  the  fashion  of  paying  any  regard  to 
the  interests  of  the  people  is  almost  abandoned  even  in 
pretence.    When  we  were  last  in  Europe  a  sort  of  republican 
or  democratic  spirit  was  prevalent,  not  only  in  the  official 
pretensions  and  varying  constitutions  of  France,  but  in  the 


398  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

political  and  literary  character  of  the  times.  It  is  scarcely 
conceivable  what  a  change  in  this  respect  has  taken  place. 
There  is  not  a  republic  left  in  Europe.  The  very  name  of  the 
people  is  everywhere  buried  in  oblivion.  In  England  the 
great  concerns  upon  which  all  the  passions  of  the  country 
concentrate  themselves,  are  intrigues  and  cabals  of  princes 
and  ministers  to  supplant  one  another,  and  the  prices  of 
seats  at  the  playhouse.  In  France  and  the  rest  of  Europe 
king-making  and  king-breaking,  orders  of  chivalry  and  dis- 
solutions of  marriage,  blanchisseusses,  princesses  and  Jacobin 
grubs  bursting  into  butterfly  princes,  dukes  and  counts, 
conscriptions  and  contributions,  famine  grinding  the  people 
into  soldiers,  soldiers  sprouting  into  sultans,  fifty  or  sixty 
upstarts  wallowing  in  more  than  Asiatic  luxury,  and  an  iron 
harrow  tearing  up  the  bowels  of  the  nations.  This  is  the 
present  history  of  the  times. 

The  country  where  we  now  are  has  perhaps  undergone  the 
least  change  of  any  in  Europe  since  I  last  saw  it,  and  that 
change  has  been  for  the  better.  The  Emperor  Alexander, 
whom  the  English  fame-blowers  once  extolled  to  the  skies, 
and  whom  they  now  vainly  attempt  to  degrade,  is  a  char- 
acter highly  distinguished  among  the  sovereigns  of  the  world. 
Young,  handsome  and  elegant  in  his  person,  affable  and 
condescending  in  his  manners,  he  possesses  qualities  yet  more 
important  and  more  commendable  in  a  powerful  and  absolute 
prince.  This  spirit  of  benevolence  and  humanity  is  so  strong 
and  so  universally  recognized,  that  they  who  wish  to  censure 
him  can  only  complain  that  this  disposition  implies  a  defect 
of  energy.  How  far  this  may  be  founded  I  have  not  the 
means  of  judging,  but  I  know  that  his  character  is  not  desti- 
tute of  firmness  and  perseverance.  This  system  of  policy 
since  the  peace  with  France  l  has  been  very  steadily  pur- 

1  Signed  at  Tilsit,  July  7,  1806. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  399 

sued,  though  undoubtedly  contrary  to  the  passions  and 
prejudices  of  almost  all  the  persons  by  whom  he  is  sur- 
rounded. It  has,  indeed,  been  hitherto  remarkably  success- 
ful, and  the  English  party  now  has  consequently  lost  much 
of  its  strength.  Still,  however,  it  would  predominate  but 
for  his  steadiness  and  decision.  This  regard  for  our  country, 
which  he  has  manifested  upon  many  occasions,  and  in  one 
very  recent  instance  as  I  have  mentioned  to  you,  is  a  proof 
not  less  of  wisdom  than  of  goodness.  It  indicates  a  mind 
capable  of  appreciating  distant  objects  and  remote  conse- 
quences, one  of  the  rarest  and  most  valuable  consequences 
that  a  statesman  can  possess.  It  has  extended  the  bounds  of 
his  Empire,  though,  as  he  himself  said  to  me,  it  is  already 
too  large;  but  his  new  acquisitions  have  certainly  con- 
tributed to  its  security,  as  well  as  its  extent.  .  .  . 


TO  GEORGE  JOY 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  19  February,  1810. 
SIR: 

Since  I  last  wrote  you  by  Mr.  Berry,  the  second  mate  of 
the  bark  William  Gray,  I  have  received  your  favor  of  9  Jan- 
uary, inclosing  the  letter  from  our  friend  Mr.  Williams,1 
of  which  you  had  previously  transmitted  to  me  a  copy,  and 
containing  the  questions  respecting  the  prospects  of  trade 
to  and  from  this  country,  which  in  your  preceding  letter  you 
had  intimated  to  me  the  intention  of  forwarding  to  me. 

These  questions  I  regret  that  it  is  not  in  my  power  to 
answer  so  confidently,  as  to  furnish  a  solid  foundation  for 
your  communications  to  your  correspondents  in  America. 
It  is  rather  from  America  or  from  England  that  the  destinies 

1  Samuel  Williams,  a  nephew  of  Timothy  Pickering. 


400  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

of  commerce  during  the  present  year  are  to  be  learnt,  than 
from  Russia.  We  are  still  ignorant  here  what  the  course  of 
the  British  government  towards  the  United  States  will  be 
since  the  termination  of  Mr.  Jackson's  mission.  We  are  still 
more  ignorant  what  will  be  the  course  pursued  by  the  United 
States.  The  newspapers  inform  us  that  the  frigate  John 
Adams  j  after  landing  her  money  at  Amsterdam,  is  to  proceed 
to  Copenhagen,  so  that  I  presume  you  will  receive  by  her 
direct  intelligence  from  our  government  upon  which  you  can 
place  more  reliance  than  upon  any  I  can  give  you. 

As  to  this  country  you  are  doubtless  acquainted  with  the 
fact,  that  notwithstanding  the  rigorous  prohibition  of  com- 
mercial intercourse  with  England,  the  quantity  of  Russian 
produce  exported  to  the  British  islands  in  the  course  of  the 
last  year  was  greater  than  ever  was  known  in  any  one  year 
before.  But  while  the  trade  of  export  has  been  only  for- 
bidden, that  of  import  has  been  in  a  great  measure  pre- 
vented, and  the  balance  has  been  very  large  against  England. 
It  is  not  improbable  that  you  have  penetrated  the  real  policy 
of  France  in  favoring  this  state  of  things,  which  perhaps  may 
be  still  more  encouraged  the  present  year  than  it  has  been 
the  last.  But  how  far  this  system  as  it  operates  will  suit  the 
British  government  appears  not  yet  very  clear.  The  minis- 
terial pamphleteers  and  Sir  Francis  DTvernois  insist  upon  it, 
that  England  prospers  under  it  to  such  a  degree  that  her  only 
danger  is  of  perishing  of  plethora.  It  may  be  so,  and  perhaps 
they  think  it  more  agreeable  to  perish  by  plethora  than  by 
famine.  But  if  his  adversaries  are  willing  to  drown  them- 
selves in  a  butt  of  Malmsey,  I  suppose  Napoleon  will  not 
very  seriously  dispute  with  them  the  choice  of  their  mode  of 
submission.  But  Mr.  Jackson  has  told  our  government,  that 
there  was  no  longer  any  motive  in  the  British  government 
for  adhering  to  their  former  Orders  of  Council  of  November, 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  401 

1807,  and  perhaps  they  have  found  by  this  time  as  little  rea- 
son to  be  satisfied  with  the  effect  of  the  Order  of  1809.  This 
freedom  of  importation  and  obstruction  of  export  may  answer 
very  well  at  the  custom  house,  but  neither  the  nation  nor 
the  government  can  be  easy  under  it  long.  The  merchants 
here  are  apprehensive  that  the  impediments  to  their  com- 
merce will  come  from  English  regulation;  that  licenses  will 
be  refused,  that  the  Baltic  will  be  blockaded,  or  that  there 
will  be  war  between  England  and  the  United  States.  You 
are  so  much  nearer  the  sources  of  information  upon  these 
subjects  than  I  am,  that  I  must  expect  it  from  instead  of 
giving  it  to  you.  I  am,  etc. 

TO  WILLIAM  EUSTIS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  28  February,  1810. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

A  few  days  since  I  was  gratified  with  the  receipt  of  your 
very  obliging  favor  of  I  October  from  Boston,  inclosing  the 
letter  to  you  from  General  [Wade]  Hampton,  with  a  number 
of  questions  respecting  the  cultivation  and  management  of 
hemp  in  this  country,  to  which  I  shall  pay  the  most  particular 
attention.1  I  shall  find  no  difficulty  in  procuring  satisfactory 

1  So  also  Henry  Dearborn,  of  Massachusetts,  asked  some  questions  about  Siberian 
wheat.  "Since  my  arrival  in  this  country,  I  have  made  frequent  inquiries,  and  of 
various  persons  likely  to  be  the  best  informed  upon  the  subject,  respecting  the 
Siberian  wheat.  I  have  learnt  with  some  surprise,  not  only  that  no  peculiar  species 
of  that  grain  is  cultivated  in  the  province,  but  that  it  scarcely  produces  any  wheat 
at  all;  and  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  article  consumed  by  its  inhabitants  is  im- 
ported from  other  parts  of  the  Empire,  and  from  Poland.  It  is  added  that  the 
practice  of  kiln  drying  is  universal,  applied  to  all  the  wheat  raised  in  every  part  of 
this  country,  and  that  none  other  could  be  obtained,  unless  by  having  it  raised  for 
the  special  purpose.  The  Province  of  Siberia  is,  indeed,  so  remote  from  this  capital, 
that  I  meet  with  scarcely  anybody  who  knows  much  about  it.  The  virtuosi  who 
collect  cabinets  of  curiosities,  speak  of  it  as  a  land  of  rocks  and  minerals.  The 


402  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

answers  to  all  these  questions,  but  I  am  afraid  it  will  be  im- 
possible to  procure  the  two  men  as  the  general  desires.  A 
general  law  of  the  country  prohibits  the  expatriation  of  all 
Russian  subjects,  and  the  condition  of  the  people  practically 
acquainted  with  the  cultivation  of  hemp,  like  that  of  almost 
all  the  people  of  this  country,  is  to  be  appendages  to  the  soil. 
This  principle  is  so  rooted  in  their  constitution,  that  a  con- 
veyance of  land  implies  the  conveyance  of  its  occupiers,  and 
that  the  occupiers  cannot  legally  be  sold  without  the  land. 
Hence  too  the  estimation  and  description  of  lands  is  drawn 
not  from  admeasurement,  but  from  the  number  of  the 
peasants  annexed,  and  I  see  almost  every  day  in  the  gazette 
lands  advertised  for  sale  of  so  many  persons  instead  of  so 
many  acres.  .  .  . 

Your  letter  was  forwarded  to  me  from  Gothenburg.  Since 
receiving  it  we  have  had  by  various  other  occasions  intelli- 
gence from  America  down  to  the  commencement  of  the 
present  year.  The  appearance  of  our  affairs  both  with  Eng- 
land and  France  wear  a  very  serious  aspect  again.  The  king 
of  Great  Britain,  however,  in  his  speech  at  the  opening  of 
the  present  session  of  Parliament  says,1  he  is  still  willing  to 
negotiate  with  us;  the  change  of  the  British  Minister  of 
foreign  affairs  may  possibly  have  produced  some  change  of 
temper  in  the  cabinet  towards  America;  but  if  Canning  has 
been  restored,  as  it  is  here  reported,  there  is  no  prospect  of 
any  adjustment  of  our  differences  with  that  country. 

The  conduct  of  France  towards  us  continues  to  be  equally 
offensive  and  injurious,  though  under  forms  less  insulting 
than  those  of  the  English.  The  Emperor  Napoleon  is  said  to 

politicians  are  acquainted  with  it  as  a  land  of  exile;  but  excepting  that  it  contains 
malachite  and  malefactors  there  is  very  little  more  generally  known  about  it  here 
than  in  Boston."  To  Henry  Dearborn,  April  25,  1810. 

1  January  23,  1810,  printed  in  Annual  Register,  1810,  430. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  403 

pursue  this  policy  against  the  opinions  of  all  his  ministers. 
There  is  perhaps  something  of  personal  feeling  in  this.  He 
doubtless  knows  that  his  own  character  is  not  much  es- 
teemed in  America,  and  he  has  no  affection  for  republics. 
He  told  some  deputation  that  was  sent  to  him  the  other  day, 
that  monarchy  was  as  necessary  to  France  as  the  sun  to  the 
system  of  the  universe. 

He  has  been  making  propositions  for  peace  to  the  British 
government,  and  is  said  to  have  offered  to  restore  Portugal 
and  Spain  as  far  north  as  the  river  Ebro  to  their  proper  sov- 
ereigns, and  for  the  rest  to  treat  upon  the  basis  of  the  uti 
possidetis.  He  probably  knows  that  these  terms  will  be  re- 
jected by  England,  but  he  intends  it  as  a  preliminary  to  his 
project  of  extending  the  bounds  of  France  to  the  Maas  on 
the  north,  and  to  the  Ebro  on  the  south.  With  this  he  in- 
tends also  to  unite  his  kingdom  of  Italy,  and  then  to  assume 
a  new  imperial  dignity.  This  is  not  all.  He  has  conceived 
the  idea  that  heroes  like  himself  are  a  species  susceptible  of 
being  propagated,  and  that  he  only  wants  a  suitable  wife  to 
produce  a  Napoleon  the  second,  whom  he  can  train  up  in  his 
own  principles  for  the  benefit  of  mankind.  He  has  therefore 
obtained  the  dissolution  of  his  marriage  with  the  Empress 
Josephine,  and  the  politicians  of  Europe  are  lost  in  the  depth 
of  conjecture,  who  is  the  princess  that  is  to  bear  the  future 
ruler  of  the  western  empire. 

You  will  perceive  by  the  dispatches  which  I  have  trans- 
mitted to  the  Secretary  of  State  since  my  arrival  here,  that 
the  disposition  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia  towards  the  United 
States  affords  a  happy  contrast  with  those  of  France  and 
England.  Of  this  disposition  you  will  find  that  something 
more  than  mere  profession  has  been  shown,  and  perhaps  it 
would  be  prudent  to  avail  ourselves  of  the  present  moment 
to  secure  by  a  commercial  treaty  advantages  which  it  may 


4o4  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

not  always  be  in  our  power  to  obtain.  The  relations  between 
this  country  and  ours  have  been  regarded  with  an  eye  of 
rivalry  and  of  jealousy  by  the  British,  and  their  influence 
here  in  ordinary  times  will  always  be,  as  it  has  heretofore 
been,  exerted  against  us. 

There  is  certainly  not  in  the  Russian  empire  a  person 
possessing  sentiments  so  strongly  favorable  to  the  United 
States  as  the  Chancellor  Count  RomanzofT,  as  there  is  with 
equal  certainty  none  so  highly  in  the  personal  confidence  of 
the  Emperor.  This  reputation  for  integrity  is  beyond  all 
reproach;  but  as  his  system  of  policy  is  anti-Britannic,  he  is 
most  notoriously  hated  by  all  the  British  party  in  this  coun- 
try. This  party  among  the  high  nobility  is  numerous  and 
powerful,  though  its  influence  is  perfectly  lifeless  so  long  as 
the  will  of  the  sovereign  is  opposed  to  it.  If  any  circum- 
stances should  occur  to  remove  Count  Romanzoff  from  the 
principal  direction  of  affairs,  we  should  lose  in  him  a  very 
valuable  friend.  The  personal  good  will  of  the  Emperor,  too, 
from  the  frequent  occasions  upon  which  he  has  manifested  it, 
and  the  manner  in  which  the  sense  of  it  has  been  received  and 
acknowledged  by  the  American  government,  has  acquired  in 
his  mind  the  force  of  a  sentiment,  and  the  increasing  inter- 
course between  the  countries  will,  I  hope,  contribute  to  give 
it  additional  strength.  I  could  wish  that  a  moment  so  favor- 
able might  be  improved  to  the  permanent  advantage  of  our 
country.  If  we  suffer  it  to  pass  away,  a  century  may  not 
give  us  such  another. 

22  March,  1810. 

It  is  no  longer  uncertain  who  is  to  be  the  Empress  of 
France.  To  the  utter  amazement  of  all  Europe  the  lot  has 
fallen  upon  an  Austrian  archduchess,  the  eldest  daughter  of 
the  Emperor  Francis.  The  consequences  of  this  new  alliance 
are  expected  to  be  as  important  to  the  future  destinies  of  the 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  405 

European  continent,  as  they  will  be  fatal  to  the  influence 
of  Great  Britain. 

The  English  government  have  rejected  the  propositions 
for  a  negotiation  of  peace,  and  French  troops  are  taking 
possession  of  Holland.  What  the  object  of  the  war  now  is  to 
England  is  not  easy  to  discover.  Spain  is  gone.  Portugal 
she  still  talks  of  defending  but  will  soon  evacuate;  the  exclu- 
sion of  their  commerce  from  the  continent  of  Europe  will  be 
attempted  with  renewed  vigor,  and  the  war  upon  all  com- 
merce according  to  all  appearances  will  be  more  unrelenting 
than  it  has  been  at  any  period  hitherto. 

The  letters  from  M.  de  Champagny  to  the  Dutch  Minister 
of  Foreign  Affairs  and  to  General  Armstrong  1  sufficiently 
indicate  the  inflexibility  with  which  the  continental  system 
will  be  pursued  by  France.  They  seem  to  put  the  only  ques- 
tion of  the  war  upon  the  Orders  of  Council  of  Novem- 
ber, 1807,  and  upon  the  point  of  Proclamation  blockades,  for 
the  legality  of  real  blockades  is  expressly  recognized.  I  have, 
indeed,  understood  from  good  authority  that  in  the  plan  of 
pacification  concerted  between  France  and  Russia,  no  aban- 
donment of  any  principle  maintained  of  ancient  time  by 
England  would  be  required  of  her.  She  would  even  probably 
be  left  in  possession  of  Malta,  the  peppercorn  for  which  she 
thought  proper  to  go  to  war.  But  if  she  still  intends  to  fight 
down  the  aggrandizement  of  France  as  M.  Champagny  says, 
the  war  will  be  long.  I  am,  etc. 

1  "The  French  newspapers  have  given  to  the  world  the  late  letter  of  the  Minister 
of  Foreign  Affairs  to  you.  It  would  seem  that  if  this  publicity  of  negotiation  is 
intended  for  the  purpose  of  operating  upon  public  opinion,  it  would  be  marked  with 
something  like  reciprocity,  and  that  both  sides  of  the  correspondence  should  be 
exhibited.  It  might,  however,  be  of  little  use  to  us  to  have  the  best  of  the  argument 
in  print,  unless  with  words  as  mild  and  with  propositions  as  plausible  as  those  ad- 
dressed to  you,  we  could  at  the  same  time  sell  as  many  vessels  and  cargoes  au 
benefice  du  Fisc"  To  John  Armstrong,  March  24,  1810.  Ms.  Champagny's  letter 


406  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

No.  12.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  24  March,  1810. 
SIR: 

I  have  received  the  letter  which  you  did  me  the  honor  to 
write  me  on  the  4th  of  December  last,  together  with  the 
copies  of  your  dispatches  to  Mr.  Pinkney  of  II  November, 
and  to  General  Armstrong  of  I  December,1  and  three  copies 
of  the  President's  message,  and  the  documents  relative  to  the 
negotiations  with  France  and  England  published  by  order 
of  the  House  of  Representatives. 

These  papers  were  forwarded  to  me  by  General  Armstrong 
and  were  brought  from  Paris  by  a  courier  dispatched  by  the 
Russian  Ambassador,  Prince  Kurakin,  to  Count  RomanzofT. 
I  sent  the  Count  a  copy  of  the  message  and  documents,  and 
a  few  days  afterwards  had  an  interview  with  him,  in  which 
he  told  me  that  the  Baron  de  Blome,  the  Danish  minister 
had  communicated  to  him  the  answer  of  his  court,  to  the 
application  made  by  order  of  the  Emperor,  for  the  release  of 
the  American  vessels  and  property  which  had  been  se- 
questered in  the  ports  of  Holstein.  This  answer  was,  that 
the  Danish  government  would  pay  the  most  particular  at- 
tention to  the  interest  which  the  Emperor  had  taken  upon 
this  occasion;  that  they  would  give  all  possible  dispatch  to 
the  proceedings;  and  that  their  own  wishes  were  entirely 
conformable  to  the  desire  of  the  Emperor  manifested  upon 
this  subject.  The  Count  expressed  his  satisfaction  that  the 
opportunity  which  the  Emperor  had  thus  taken  to  show  his 

to  Armstrong,  February  14,  1810,  is  in  American  State  Papers,  Foreign  Relations, 
III.  380. 

1  The  letter  to  Armstrong  is  in  American  State  Papers,  Foreign  Relations,  III.  326. 


isio]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  407 

friendship  for  the  United  States  had  been  attended  with  this 
success.  He  regretted  that  the  commerce  of  the  United 
States  elsewhere  appeared  still  to  be  subject  to  seizures  and 
ill-treatment,  and  that  altogether  it  seemed  impossible  there 
should  be  any  safe  commerce  until  the  peace.  That  the 
profligacy  with  which  the  English,  under  at  least  the  obvious 
connivance  of  their  government  were  attempting  to  carry 
on  their  trade  with  fraud  and  forgery  was  such  as  he  could 
not  reflect  upon  without  astonishment.  The  English  were 
a  nation  illustrious  by  the  men  of  genius  and  learning,  dis- 
tinguished in  the  arts  and  sciences  whom  they  had  produced, 
illustrious  by  the  degree  of  power  and  importance  in  the 
affairs  of  the  world,  which  they  had  attained.  Their  com- 
merce also  had  been  very  extensive,  and  although  it  was 
known  that  in  their  commercial  intercourse  with  others  their 
activity  and  enterprize  gave  them  advantages,  of  which  they 
were  always  eager  to  make  the  most  they  could;  that  they 
would  make  those  with  whom  they  would  treat  commit  as 
many  faults  as  they  could  lead  them  into,  and  turn  them 
with  all  their  ingenuity  and  address  to  their  own  benefit.  In 
short  that  they  had  an  extraordinary  talent  at  making  profit- 
able bargains,  yet  there  was  a  sort  of  integrity  to  the  reputa- 
tion of  which  they  had  always  aspired,  and  which  they  had 
acquired.  A  British  merchant  had  been  considered  as  a 
man  of  principle,  who  would  disdain  for  the  mere  profits  of 
trade  to  participate  in  a  base  or  infamous  transaction.  But 
now,  said  the  Count,  I  will  give  you  a  sample  of  what  are 
the  principles  of  British  merchants.  There  arrived  in  our 
ports  last  autumn  thirteen  ships  and  cargoes,  which  entered 
as  coming  from  the  port  of  Lisbon,  under  neutral  colors. 
Among  the  documents  which  they  exhibited  was  a  certificate 
of  origin  apparently  under  the  hand  and  seal  of  the  Russian 
consul  at  Lisbon.  This  gentleman  has  long  been  personally 


4o8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

well  known  to  me,  and  I  have  a  high  esteem  for  his  character 
and  good  conduct;  in  which  point  of  view  I  have  often  men- 
tioned him  to  the  Emperor  himself.  I  had  no  reason  on 
seeing  these  certificates  of  origin  to  doubt  from  the  appear- 
ance of  the  hand  or  seal,  of  their  authenticity;  but  as  the 
vessels  have  been  detained  here  over  winter  by  the  ice,  and 
as  I  had  time  in  that  interval  to  get  an  answer  from  him,  I 
took  good  measures  to  get  a  letter  transmitted  to  him,  with 
a  list  of  these  vessels,  and  of  the  documents  apparently  ex- 
ecuted by  him  and  an  enquiry  whether  these  were  all  au- 
thentic. I  have  lately  received  his  answer,  and  not  one  of 
the  documents  is  genuine.  The  whole  thirteen  are  forgeries. 
Now  I  ask,  what  difference  in  principle  there  is  between  this 
case,  and  the  same  transaction  upon  the  seal  of  a  deed  or  the 
signature  of  a  bill  of  exchange?  And  what  is  one  to  think  of 
a  government  which  licenses  people  to  trade  on  such  docu- 
ments? He  then  continued  that  the  charge  des  affaires  of 
the  Queen  of  Portugal  had  urgently  insisted  for  the  admis- 
sion of  Portuguese  vessels  from  Lisbon.  This  was  impossible. 
The  Emperor  had  made  no  change  in  his  relations  with  Portu- 
gal. He  was  not  at  war  with  Portugal,  he  continued  to  receive 
Mr.  Navarro  as  the  Queen's  charge  des  affaires.  Portuguese 
vessels  from  Brazil,  or  elsewhere,  not  enemy's  ports,  would  be 
freely  admitted;  but  from  places  notoriously  in  possession  of 
the  English,  it  could  not  be,  without  making  a  burlesque  of 
the  imperial  ordinances  against  trading  with  the  English. 

On  some  allusion  that  I  made  to  the  conduct  of  the  French 
government  and  its  dependencies  towards  the  United  States, 
which  I  told  him  would  powerfully  negotiate  in  America  in 
favor  of  England,  he  asked  me  whether  I  knew  that  Colonel 
Burr  was  gone  to  Paris.1  I  said  I  had  heard  he  was  arrived 

1  Burr  had  reached  Paris  February  16.     The  Private  Journal  of  Aaron  Burr, 
printed  by  W.  K.  Bixby,  is  silent  uporf  an  application  for  a  passport  to  Russia. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  409 

there.  He  said  he  did  not  know  of  his  arrival;  but  that  he 
knew  from  a  certain  source  that  he  was  gone  there.  He  said 
Colonel  Burr  had  written  a  letter  to  him  requesting  per- 
mission to  come  here;  but  that  not  being  desirous  of  encour- 
aging people  who  had  fled  from  the  violated  laws  of  their 
own  country,  to  come  into  this,  he  had  not  answered  his 
letter.  If  he  wanted  to  come  here  he  must  make  his  ap- 
plication through  the  minister  of  the  United  States,  at  whose 
request  he  would  have  been  readily  admitted.  The  Count 
added  some  enquiries  respecting  the  project  heretofore 
undertaken  by  Colonel  Burr,  and  from  all  his  conversation 
taken  together,  it  appeared  to  me  to  be  his  impression  that 
this  project  was  not  yet  altogether  abandoned.  Some  of  the 
English  newspapers  have  asserted  in  positive  terms  that  the 
Colonel  had  proposed  to  the  French  government  a  plan  for 
effecting  a  separation  of  the  States;  that  he  had  while  in 
England  made  the  same  proposition  to  the  British  ministry 
with  the  declared  purpose  of  making  it  if  rejected  by  them 
to  France.  It  does  not  appear  from  whose  confidence  the 
publishers  of  these  paragraphs  obtained  their  information. 
If  overtures  of  this  nature  were  really  made  by  Mr.  Burr  to 
the  British  ministers,  you  have  doubtless  more  unequivocal 
intelligence  of  them  than  through  the  medium  of  newspaper 
secrets.  Mr.  Burr's  movements  from  England  to  Sweden, 
and  thence  through  Denmark,  Hamburg,  and  Frankfort  to 
Paris,  have  been  watched  and  noted  by  the  governments  of 
Europe,  as  well  as  by  the  publishers  of  newspapers;  and  from 
the  repeated  mention  made  of  him  to  me  by  Count  Roman- 
zoff,  I  am  persuaded  that  he  considers  him  as  a  person  still 
entitled  to  attention. 

Since  I  saw  the  Count,  he  has  concluded  with  Mr.  Navarro, 
the  Portuguese  charge  des  affaires,  a  convention  renewing 
for  one  year  the  treaty  between  Portugal  and  Russia,  which 


4io  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

had  expired;  but  with  the  modification  which  the  Count  in 
his  conversation  with  me  had  mentioned  as  necessary;  that 
is,  that  the  admission  of  Portuguese  vessels  is  confined  to 
those  which  come  from  Brazil,  or  the  American  dominions 
of  Portugal,  and  does  not  extend  to  the  ports  of  the  European 
kingdom. 

I  have  the  honor  to  enclose  copies  of  a  note,  which  I 
received  some  time  since  from  Count  Romanzoff,  and  of  my 
answer,  which  a  severe  indisposition  prevented  me  from 
sending  to  him  until  the  time  of  its  date.  It  is  much  to  be 
lamented  that  the  misconduct  of  any  of  our  citizens  should 
have  such  a  tendency  to  counteract  the  friendly  dispositions 
of  the  Emperor;  and  the  repetition  of  any  such  outrage 
would  certainly  lead  to  measures  of  restriction  upon  all  Amer- 
icans coming  into  this  country,  which  would  subject  them 
to  serious  inconveniences.  If  this  Captain  Arnold  can  be 
brought  to  answer  for  his  conduct  on  this  occasion,  by  any 
constitutional  process  in  our  tribunals,  the  nature  of  his 
offence  deserves  the  most  exemplary  punishment.  But  en- 
tertaining doubts,  both  with  regard  to  the  point  of  jurisdic- 
tion, and  to  the  means  of  proof  which  would  be  necessary 
for  his  conviction,  I  have  avoided  in  my  answer  leading  to 
the  expectation  of  a  positive  prosecution  of  Captain  Arnold 
in  the  United  States.  Perhaps  the  Emperor  may  be  satis- 
fied with  this,  but  I  have  to  request  the  President's  instruc- 
tions what  I  am  to  answer  further  upon  the  subject;  particu- 
larly if  the  Count  should  recur  to  it  again  hereafter. 

I  have  the  honor,  etc. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  411 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

No.  13.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  30  March,  1810. 
SIR: 

A  few  days  since  I  received  from  a  Mr.  Sicard,  a  merchant 
established  at  Odessa,  a  letter  informing  me  of  the  arrival 
at  that  place  of  an  American  vessel,  the  Calumet,  Captain 
Holms,  from  Constantinople,  having  on  board  a  Mr.  Green, 
who  had  written  to  me  from  Constantinople,  but  whose  letter 
has  not  yet  come  to  my  hands.  Captain  Holms  it  appears 
was  the  bearer  of  a  letter  of  recommendation  from  Mr. 
Daschkoff  to  the  Duke  de  Richelieu,  the  Governor  of  Odessa. 
The  French  consul  at  that  place  in  the  first  instance  mani- 
fested some  suspicion  that  the  Calumet  was  an  English  vessel, 
with  simulated  American  colors,  but  is  stated  to  have  been 
satisfied,  on  information  of  the  letter  from  Mr.  Daschkoff. 

It  is  stated  that  this  vessel  is  the  first  which  has  ever  dis- 
played the  flag  of  the  United  States,  upon  the  Black  Sea. 
Mr.  Sicard  mentions  that  he  expects  in  the  course  of  a  few 
days  the  arrival  of  another  vessel,  commanded  by  a  Captain 
Ropes,  from  Constantinople.  By  what  means  they  obtained 
admission  to  Constantinople,  and  to  navigate  the  Black  Sea, 
I  have  not  been  informed.  Probably  the  letter  from  Mr. 
Green  which  I  have  not  received  contained  an  explanation 
of  this  event. 

By  the  note  from  Count  Romanzoff,  of  which  I  have  the 
honor  to  enclose  herewith  a  copy,  you  will  perceive  the 
light  in  which  this  circumstance  is  viewed  by  the  Russian 
government.  The  establishment  at  Odessa  is  an  object  of 
peculiar  interest  and  favor  to  the  Emperor  Alexander,  and 
if  a  free  access  to  the  navigation  of  the  United  States  could 


4i2  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

be  obtained  and  secured  upon  the  Black  Sea,  it  would  un- 
doubtedly open  a  new  and  most  important  source  of  profit 
to  the  commerce  of  our  country. 

At  the  close  of  my  answer  to  Count  RomanzofFs  note,  a 
copy  of  which  is  likewise  enclosed,  I  requested  a  personal 
interview  with  him;  for  which  he  appointed  the  ensuing 
morning.  My  objects  in  wishing  a  conversation  with  him, 
related  to  the  case  of  an  American  vessel  and  cargo,  which, 
have  been  seized  and  condemned  at  Archangel,  for  infrac- 
tions of  the  imperial  ukase  of  9  May,  1809,  the  owner  of 
which,  Mr.  George  Cutts,  has  passed  the  winter  here,  and 
the  restitution  of  whose  property  I  was  desirous  if  possible 
of  obtaining;  and  also  to  intelligence  recently  received  from 
Copenhagen,  that  a  large  number  of  privateers  are  fitting 
out  in  the  ports  of  Denmark,  and  that  a  new  privateering 
ordinance  is  to  be  issued  by  the  government  of  that  country. 
This  information  has  given  great  alarm  to  the  Americans 
now  here,  and  who  are  preparing  to  return  to  the  United 
States  at  the  opening  of  the  navigation.  Though  I  do  not 
apprehend  that  there  will  be  much  danger  of  molestation 
from  that  quarter  to  vessels  going  from  this  country,  and 
out  of  the  Baltic,  yet  as  undoubtedly  vessels  coming  hither, 
especially  if  laden  with  what  are  termed  colonial  articles, 
will  be  intercepted  by  the  Danish  privateers,  if  they  should 
again  issue  with  the  authority  of  their  government,  I  wished 
if  possible  to  engage  the  influence  of  this  government  to 
secure  the  freedom  of  our  navigation  to  its  ports. 

Mr.  Cutts's  vessel,  the  Intercourse,1  entered  at  Archangel 
as  coming  from  the  port  of  Bilbao,  but  it  appeared  upon  the 
examination  of  the  commissioners,  that  she  came  last  from 
Gothenburg;  and  she  entered  before  the  conclusion  of  the 

1  Sailing  from  Portsmouth,  New  Hampshire,  in  February,  1807. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  413 

peace,  between  Sweden  and  Russia.1  She  was  also  not  pro- 
vided with  a  role  d?  equipage,  or  muster  roll,  duly  authenti- 
cated to  prove  the  neutrality  of  her  company.  The  sentence 
of  the  commissioners  also  mentions,  that  Mr.  Cutts  had  no 
passport  for  himself.  These  were  certainly  causes  for  con- 
demnation conformably  to  the  imperial  ordinance.  Mr. 
Harris  had  some  time  since  presented  a  note  to  Count 
RomanzofF,  claiming  the  restitution  of  the  property  on  the 
ground  of  right.  In  my  conversation  with  the  Count  I  en- 
deavored without  abandoning  that  to  bespeak  a  disposition 
of  indulgence.  The  want  of  so  material  a  paper  as  the  at- 
tested muster  roll,  and  the  entrance  from  an  enemy's  port, 
in  direct  contravention  against  the  law  of  the  Empire  leave 
but  little  prospect  of  success  to  the  application  upon  either 
principle;  and  although  Count  Romanzoff  has  promised  to 
give  the  subject  due  consideration,  I  have  no  doubt  but  that 
the  property  will  remain  finally  condemned. 

I  mentioned  to  the  Count  the  intelligence  from  Copen- 
hagen, that  a  new  swarm  of  privateers  was  fitting  out,  and 
that  a  new  sanction  for  their  depredations  was  about  to  issue 
from  their  government.  I  suggested  to  him  the  apprehension 
that  they  might  even  obstruct  the  passage  of  our  vessels 
going  home  from  the  ports  of  this  country,  and  that  they 
probably  would  arrest  many  on  their  way  hither  coming 
from  America.  And  the  freedom  of  this  commerce  being 
no  less  advantageous  to  the  interests  of  Russia  than  of  the 
United  States,  I  observed  that  an  intimation  from  this  gov- 
ernment to  the  court  of  Denmark,  of  an  expectation  that 
the  avenues  to  the  Russian  ports,  would  not  be  stopped  to 
the  lawful  commerce  of  neutrals,  might  prevent  the  excesses 
which  the  experience  of  the  last  year  has  given  too  much 
reason  to  expect  from  Danish  privateers.  The  Count  said 

1  September  17,  1809.    Annual  Register,  1809,  784. 


4i4  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

that  if  the  passage  of  vessels  lawfully  trading  and  coming  to 
this  country  or  going  from  it  should  be  impeded,  this  gov- 
ernment might  indeed  address  reclamations  to  the  court  of 
Denmark;  but  he  did  not  see  the  possibility  of  making  any 
remonstrance  of  that  nature,  by  way  of  anticipation,  or  of 
stating  an  objection  against  the  issuing  of  commissions  to 
privateers,  or  of  an  ordinance  for  their  regulation.  He 
added  that  if  this  step  should  be  taken  by  the  Danish  gov- 
ernment, it  would  undoubtedly  be  at  the  instigation  of 
France,  in  which  case,  a  remonstrance  from  elsewhere  could 
not  much  avail;  that  he  lamented  the  distressing  situation  of 
commerce  in  general,  but  that  there  was  no  remedy  for  it, 
but  in  a  general  peace.  England  and  France  in  the  pursuit 
of  their  measures  appeared  equally  violent  and  inflexible, 
and  no  relaxation  on  either  side  was  to  be  expected  until 
they  could  come  to  terms  of  peace. 

The  remainder  of  the  conversation  was  relative  to  the 
general  state  of  affairs,1  and  to  the  probability  of  a  negotia- 
tion for  peace,  of  which  the  Count  appears  to  be  extremely 
desirous;  which  the  interest  of  Russia  very  forcibly  requires; 
but  which  from  the  composition  of  the  British  ministry  the 
Count  considers  as  yet  very  distant.  By  the  late  accounts 
from  England,  it  is  probable  that  some  change  in  the  min- 
istry will  soon  take  place,  but  he  sees  no  appearance  of  such 
a  change  as  will  lead  to  peace  —  a  mere  change  of  men; 
without  that  essential  change  of  political  system,  to  which 
England  must  come  before  any  rational  hopes  of  peace  can 
be  entertained.  If  the  change  should  bring  in  Mr.  Canning, 
it  would  only  make  the  continuance  of  the  war  more  cer- 
tain. Even  if  Lord  Grenville  and  Lord  Grey  should  come  in 
at  the  head  of  a  new  ministry,  the  prospect  in  his  opinion 
would  not  be  much  more  favorable.  Lord  Grenville  he 

1  More  fully  related  in  Memoirs,  March  27,  1810. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  415 

thinks,  only  disapproves  the  mode  of  carrying  on  war  by 
expeditions,  and  if  he  should  be  at  the  head  of  affairs,  would 
recur  to  his  old  system  of  fighting  with  subsidies. 

Whether  any  relaxation  of  the  system  pursued  for  the  last 
two  years,  is  to  be  expected  from  Great  Britain,  is  yet  un- 
certain. That  of  France  is  more  violent,  and  more  deter- 
mined than  ever.  From  every  measure  of  the  French  gov- 
ernment since  their  last  peace  with  Austria,  it  is  apparent 
that  in  order  to  prevent  the  trade  between  Great  Britain 
and  the  continent,  it  will  not  be  suffered  in  any  vessels,  of  any 
nation.  The  confiscations  of  American  vessels  and  their 
cargoes  which  have  lately  taken  place  in  Spain,  and  Naples  as 
well  as  in  France,  are  but  the  indications  of  the  fate  which 
will  await  our  commerce,  in  every  part  of  the  European  con- 
tinent. I  trust  there  will  yet  be  an  exception  for  those 
which  may  reach  the  ports  of  Russia;  but  if  Denmark  should 
again  commission  her  privateers,  the  Baltic  will  be  closed 
against  our  trade  almost  as  effectually  as  the  other  European 
seas. 

I  am,  etc. 

P.  S.  —  Mr.  J.  S.  Smith,  arrived  this  evening  from  Stock- 
holm; having  been  finally  obliged  to  come  round  the  gulph 
of  Bothnia  by  land.  He  was  accompanied  by  Mr.  Maclure, 
and  in  good  health.1 

1  "You  are  accused  by  the  English  newspapers  of  April  9th  in  the  following 
terms:  'The  American  minister  is  the  meddling  advocate  for  the  exclusion  of  Amer- 
ican vessels  from  the  Russian  ports,  under  pretence  of  preventing  the  frauds  prac- 
tised under  the  American  flag;  but  in  reality  in  prosecution  of  the  Jeffersonian  anti- 
commercial  system.'  And  this  sensible  paragraph  is  copied  into  the  federal  papers, 
without  any  comment  and  to  pass  where  it  will  for  truth.  The  British  party  wish  to 
render  the  mission  to  Russia  as  unpopular  as  possible."  Abigail  Adams  to  John 
Quincy  Adams,  May  28,  1810.  Ms. 


4i6  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

No.  14.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,   19  April,   1810. 

SIR: 

Since  I  had  the  honor  of  writing  you  last,  I  have  had  no 
further  direct  information  concerning  the  American  vessel 
which  had  arrived  at  Odessa.  The  letter  which  Mr.  Green 
the  supercargo  of  the  vessel  had  written  me  from  Constanti- 
nople has  not  come  to  hand,  but  by  a  subsequent  letter  from 
the  same  gentleman  to  Mr.  Harris  I  learn  that  the  necessities 
of  the  Turkish  government  arising  from  the  scarcity  of  grain 
at  Constantinople  had  procured  the  admission  of  this  vessel 
and  of  several  others  to  the  Black  Sea.  A  Turkish  merchant 
had  contracted  to  obtain  twenty  cargoes  of  wheat  at  Odessa, 
if  the  Russian  government  should  permit  exportation;  and 
as  a  neutral  flag  was  necessary  to  secure  admission  into  the 
Russian  ports,  this  and  some  other  American  vessels  were 
engaged  for  the  purpose,  and  with  the  assent  of  the  Porte, 
proceeded  into  the  Black  Sea.  On  their  arrival  at  Odessa, 
however,  they  found  the  exportation  of  grain  to  the  Turkish 
dominions  prohibited,  and  are  therefore  unable  to  perform 
that  part  of  the  contract  in  consideration  of  which  the 
rigor  of  the  Turkish  prohibitions  had  been  relaxed  in  their 
favor.  Whether  under  these  circumstances  they  will  be 
allowed  to  repass  the  Straits  without  molestation  from  the 
Turks  may  be  problematical.  The  note  which  I  received  on 
the  subject  from  Count  Romanzoff,  and  of  which  I  trans- 
mitted you  a  copy,  shows  how  favorable  the  disposition 
of  this  government  is  to  the  extension  which  our  commerce 
would  receive  by  a  free  admission  to  that  part  of  the  Russian 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  417 

dominions;  but  the  jealousy  of  the  French  consul  at  Odessa 
was  roused  by  the  appearance  of  the  American  flag,  which  he 
naturally  enough  considered  as  assumed  to  disguise  an  Eng- 
lish vessel;  and  since  the  arrival  of  several  others,  bearing 
the  same  colors,  the  number  of  which  the  rumors  of  this 
capital  have  exaggerated  to  forty,  the  French  Ambassador 
has  manifested  a  similar  jealousy  to  Count  RomanzofT.  The 
Count  who  informed  me  of  this  last  week  had  not  received 
any  official  intelligence  of  the  arrival  of  any  other  vessel  than 
the  first,  which  he  told  me  he  had  assured  the  Ambassador 
was  bonafide  and  certainly  American;  having  brought  a  letter 
of  recommendation  from  Mr.  DaschkofT  himself  to  the  Duke 
de  Richelieu,  the  governor  of  Odessa. 

The  relations  between  France  and  Russia,  have  apparently 
been  themselves  somewhat  affected  by  the  recent  changes  in 
the  state  of  European  affairs;  and  most  especially  in  con- 
sequence of  the  new  alliance  between  France  and  Austria, 
formed  by  the  marriage  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon  with  the 
Archduchess  Maria  Louisa,  eldest  daughter  of  the  Emperor 
of  Austria.  In  the  late  war  between  France  and  Austria 
Russia  was  at  least  in  point  of  form  a  party  as  auxiliary  to 
France.  And  in  the  treaty  of  peace  it  was  stipulated  that  a 
territory  containing  four  hundred  thousand  inhabitants  in 
the  province  of  Galicia  should  be  ceded  by  Austria  to  Russia. 
Soon  after  the  conclusion  of  the  peace,  an  Austrian  officer  of 
rank,  Count  St.  Julien,  arrived  here,  authorised  to  treat  for 
the  execution  of  this  stipulation,  but  without  being  vested 
with  any  formal  diplomatic  character.  In  arranging  the 
convention  to  carry  the  cession  into  effect,  a  question  was 
made  by  Russia,  which  arose  from  a  mode  of  computing 
inhabitants  peculiar  to  this  country.  By  a  territory  of  so 
many  inhabitants  they  understand  the  number  not  of  souls, 
but  of  families;  and  they  considered  this  as  the  proper  con- 


4i8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

struction  to  be  given  to  the  stipulation  of  cession  made  in 
their  favor.  As  the  treaty  had  been  between  Austria  and 
France,  it  was  agreed  to  refer  for  the  meaning  of  this  article 
to  the  opinion  of  the  French  government,  which  was  given 
in  favor  of  Austria.  In  this  decision,  Russia  did  not  hesitate 
to  acquiesce,  and  the  convention  has  been  concluded  and 
ratified  by  both  sovereigns  accordingly.  A  circumstance 
which  has  excited  much  more  the  attention  of  political  ob- 
servers, because  as  an  omission  of  formalities  it  has  been 
more  generally  known,  is,  that  to  this  day  there  has  been 
no  public  and  formal  communication  of  this  marriage,  made 
to  the  Russian  government,  either  by  Austria  or  France. 
The  negotiation  which  terminated  in  this  contract  of  mar- 
riage was  not  only  kept  a  profound  secret  to  the  Russian 
Ambassador  at  Paris,  but  he  was  even  led  to  believe  and  to 
communicate  to  his  court  the  belief  that  the  choice  of  the 
Emperor  Napoleon  had  fixed  upon  a  different  person.  I  am 
told  that  there  has  been  a  confidential  communication  of  the 
marriage,  made  by  the  French  Ambassador  here  to  the  Em- 
peror Alexander  in  person,  and  this  account  is  in  all  prob- 
ability true;  for  one  of  the  first  noblemen  and  principal 
ministers  of  the  Empire,  Prince  Alexis  Kurakin,  brother  of 
the  Russian  Ambassador  at  Paris,  is  appointed  Ambassador 
extraordinary  to  compliment  the  Emperor  Napoleon  upon 
this  event,  and  is  already  gone  to  execute  this  mission.  But 
symptoms  of  regret  have  been  suffered  to  appear  in  official 
French  papers  at  the  sacrifice  which  Sweden  was  compelled 
to  make  of  Finland,  at  the  late  peace  of  Fredericshamn,  and 
the  Emperor  of  the  French  has  himself  declared  that  he  will 
protect  the  Porte  if  the  Sultan  will  extricate  himself  from  the 
influence  of  England.  Russia  wages  at  this  moment  a  war  of 
oppressive  expense,  and  of  equivocal  success  against  the 
Porte.  The  Emperor  Alexander  wishes  much  the  termina- 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  419 

tion  of  this  war,  but  considers  it  indispensable  to  obtain  at 
the  peace  the  entire  sovereignty  of  the  provinces  of  Moldavia 
and  Wallachia.  The  assent  of  France  to  this  arrangement 
has  already  been  obtained,  but  there  is  some  reason  to  be- 
lieve that  now  France  will  not  be  displeased,  if  eventually  the 
war  should  conclude  without  securing  this  new  accession  to 
the  Russian  dominions.  This  disposition  might  acquire  new 
strength  also,  if  the  Porte,  by  breaking  off  all  connection 
with  England,  should  lay  a  claim  to  the  Emperor  Napoleon's 
promise  of  protection.  But  the  point  upon  which  a  difference 
between  the  policy  of  France  and  of  Russia  may  be  the  most 
difficult  to  conciliate,  is  that  of  the  commercial  intercourse 
with  England,  which,  though  severely  forbidden  by  the 
Russian  ordinances,  was  carried  on  through  the  course  of 
the  last  year  to  a  great  extent.  This  commerce,  altogether 
advantageous  to  Russia,  highly  important  to  her  revenues, 
and  in  the  present  condition  of  her  finances,  perhaps  of  ab- 
solute necessity  to  preserve  her  from  a  formal  bankruptcy,  is 
however  incompatible  with  the  design  of  the  French  Em- 
peror, to  annihilate  the  commerce  of  England  with  the  con- 
tinent of  Europe.  The  measures  which  in  the  pursuit  of  his 
purpose  he  has  successively  imposed  upon  Denmark,  Sweden, 
Austria,  Holland,  the  Rhenish  Confederation,  and  Prussia, 
have  already  been  made  known  to  you.  They  will  all  how- 
ever prove  ineffectual  while  the  intercourse  between  England 
and  Russia  can  be  kept  open.  The  necessity  of  strong  meas- 
ures to  render  the  former  prohibitions  effectual,  have  been 
and  continue  to  be  pressed  upon  this  government  by  France, 
and  have  not  yet  been  entirely  successful.  I  wish,  though 
without  very  confidently  hoping  that  the  regulations  which 
Russia  may  finally  be  prevailed  upon  to  adopt,  our  own  com- 
merce may  be  altogether  exempted  from  that  proscription, 
which  will  again  be  denounced  against  the  commerce  of 


420 


THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 


England  -   -  that  commerce  which  like  the  hind  of  Dryden's 
fable  has  been  so  often  "doomed  to  death,  though  fated  not 

to  die." 

The  English  government  has  not  neglected  the  opportunity 
which  the  declining  ardor  of  the  political  harmony  between 
France  and  Russia  seemed  to  present,  for  producing  a  rup- 
ture between  them.  The  English  party  here  have  been  active 
in  such  proceedings  as  the  nature  of  the  government  would 
admit,  and  secret  propositions  have  been  made  from  Eng- 
land for  a  separate  negotiation  with  Russia,  which  have  been 
rejected  with  pointed  decision.  The  ascendancy  of  France 
at  this  court  will  without  doubt  be  more  firmly  secured  by 
the  result  of  her  new  alliance  with  Austria,  even  if  it  should 
be  brought  to  the  test  by  the  requisition  of  measures  the 
most  repugnant  to  the  inclinations  of  the  government,  as 
well  as  to  the  interests  of  the  nation. 

I  have  the  honor,  etc. 

TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  21  April,  1810. 
..«»••• 

I  have  hitherto  scarcely  written  you  anything  upon  the 
political  affairs  of  Europe.  Events,  which  in  ordinary  times 
would  be  considered  as  of  extraordinary  magnitude,  succeed 
one  another  in  such  rapid  succession,  that  I  should  hardly 
have  had  the  means  of  sending  away  a  view  of  the  public 
appearance  of  Europe,  before  it  would  have  assumed  a  new 
one.  At  the  time  when  I  embarked  at  Charlestown,  a  war 
almost  universal  was  raging  upon  this  continent.  Since  then 
the  peace  of  Sweden  has  been  concluded  with  Russia,  with 
Denmark,  and  with  France;  that  of  France  and  Russia  with 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  .  421 

Austria  has  been  succeeded  by  the  dissolution  of  marriage 
between  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  and  his  second  marriage 
with  the  eldest  daughter  of  the  Emperor  of  Austria.  The 
consequences  anticipated  from  this  last  event,  the  most  un- 
expected of  any  of  those  which  I  have  mentioned,  are  greater 
than  from  all  the  others  together.  It  has  not  only  given  the 
most  cheering  hopes  to  the  house  of  Austria  that  it  will  be 
preserved  from  the  downfall  of  the  Bourbons,  but  the  whole 
continent  of  Europe  considers  it  as  a  pledge  of  future  peace 
and  tranquillity,  which  may  very  possibly  not  be  realized. 
Its  tendency  to  consolidate  and  give  stability  to  the  new  im- 
perial family  of  France  is  more  obvious  and  more  certain. 
Napoleon  is  the  Croesus  of  the  age,  and  those  who  believe 
that  the  universe  is  governed  by  the  wisdom  and  goodness 
of  a  superior  being,  can  only  recur  to  the  caution  of  Solon, 
and  beware  of  pronouncing  upon  a  man's  fortune  until  they 
have  witnessed  his  end. 

In  the  meantime  everything  that  occurs  in  the  world  seems 
to  be  fashioned  in  subserviency  to  his  views.  British  politi- 
cians and  their  disciples  throughout  the  world  have  hitherto 
found  no  other  expedient,  than  to  stimulate  resistance  against 
him  where  it  could  not  fail  to  be  subdued,  and  to  stigmatize 
the  victims  which  they  have  successively  offered  up  in  sacri- 
fice to  him.  He  said,  or  wrote  on  a  late  occasion,  that  the 
genius  of  France  had  directed  the  British  government  in 
their  expedition  to  the  Scheldt;  but  a  genius  favorable  to 
him  appears  to  have  inspired  the  British  councils  from  the 
moment  when,  in  the  face  of  their  engagements,  they  set 
him  at  defiance,  to  keep  possession  of  the  island  of  Malta. 
To  those  who  feel  a  real  concern  for  the  independence  of 
nations  and  the  liberties  of  mankind,  it  is  truly  mortifying 
to  observe  the  little  men  and  the  little  means,  by  which  the 
great  powers  and  resources  of  England  are  wasted  in  this 


422  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

contest.  When  we  read  in  ancient  history  the  final  struggle 
between  Rome  and  Carthage,  we  see  the  triumph  of  one 
system  of  political  institutions  over  another,  but  the  great- 
est man  is  on  the  vanquished  side.  Now  we  have  a  more 
melancholy  spectacle,  the  superior  system  of  political  insti- 
tutions defeated  by  the  individual  imbecility  of  its  sup- 
porters. That  it  may  remain  no  secret  to  the  world,  a  par- 
liamentary inquiry  has  been  many  weeks  employed  to  expose 
it  in  its  minutest  and  most  disgusting  details.  The  expedi- 
tion to  Walcheren  is  but  a  single  specimen  of  the  manner  in 
which  the  great  affairs  of  the  British  nation  are  managed. 
It  appears  to  have  been  undertaken  in  the  fact  of  what  to 
men  of  common  sense  must  have  been  considered  a  demon- 
stration of  its  impracticability.  Its  conduct  was  then 
committed  to  a  man,1  who  would  hardly  have  been  fit  to 
take  possession  of  the  place  after  its  capitulation.  Twenty 
thousand  men  are  sent  into  the  midst  of  a  notorious  pesti- 
lence, and  when  the  physician  general  of  the  army  is  ordered 
to  go  to  their  relief,  he  positively  refuses  on  the  avowed 
ground  that  he  knows  nothing  about  contagious  distempers. 
When  this  wise  undertaking  comes  to  its  natural  termina- 
tion, the  ministers  try  to  throw  the  blame  of  the  failure  upon 
their  colleague  the  general.  The  general  puts  it  off  upon  his 
coadjutor  the  commander  of  the  fleet.2  One  intrigues  against 
his  associates  with  the  king,  another  betrays  his  friend  by  a 
sham  defence  of  his  in  Parliament.  Ignorance  and  folly  ap- 
pear alike  conspicuous  in  all,  and  those  are  the  antagonists 
who  are  to  maintain  the  balance  of  the  world  against  the 
genius  and  the  fortune  of  Bonaparte. 

The  choice  of  Mr.  Jackson,  and  the  manner  in  which  he 
executed  his  mission  in  America,  furnish  another  chapter  of 

1  John  Pitt,  second  Earl  of  Chatham  (1756-1835). 

2  Sir  Richard  John  Strachan  (1760-1828). 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  423 

the  same  history  perfectly  corresponding  with  it  in  its  char- 
acteristic features.  Fortunately  both  for  England  and  for 
us,  when  Mr.  Jackson's  hard  studied  vivacities  and  their 
effects  come  back  to  Europe,  the  facetious  and  spirited 
gentleman,1  who  had  sent  him  out  to  repair  the  cracks  and 
flaws  of  his  master's  dignity,  was  laid  up  with  a  lame  leg, 
caught  in  the  attempt  to  trip  up  the  heels  of  a  ministerial 
colleague,2  and  was  engaging  the  leisure  of  a  temporary  re- 
tirement from  the  Cabinet. 

His  successor,3  of  whose  personal  character  I  have  little 
knowledge,  appears  at  least  to  be  gifted  with  a  little  more  dis- 
cretion, and  has  not  undertaken  to  bear  out  Mr.  Jackson  in 
his  lofty  pretensions  and  fiery  temper.  What  the  actual 
state  of  our  affairs  with  England  is  I  am  not  authentically 
informed,  but  the  rumors  of  the  Gazette  announce  that  a 
new  convention  has  been  signed  by  Mr.  Pinkney  and  the 
Marquis  Wellesley,  to  take  effect  in  case  it  should  be  ratified 
by  the  American  government. 

It  is  much  to  be  wished  that  this  may  be  true.  If  it  should 
prove  so,  and  our  commercial  and  amicable  intercourse  with 
England  should  be  restored,  I  am  persuaded  that  France  and 
her  dependents  will  follow  the  example.  At  present  they 
are  heaping  outrage  upon  outrage  in  their  treatment  of  us. 
If  our  merchants  have  not  been  allowed  to  arm  their  vessels, 
nine-tenths  of  those  which  may  hazard  a  European  voyage 
will  meet  no  other  reception  than  seizure  and  confiscation. 
But  if  we  could  once  make  an  arrangement  with  England 
consistent  with  our  right  and  our  honor,  our  commerce  is 
competent  to  defend  itself  against  all  other  force  that  it 

1  Canning. 

2  Castlereagh.    The  reference  is  to  the  duel  between  the  two  men,  Canning  being 
slightly  wounded  in  the  thigh. 

3  Richard  Colley  Wellesley,  Marquess  Wellesley  (1760-1842). 


424  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

would  meet  upon  the  ocean,  and  to  teach  once  more  a  lesson 
of  forbearance  and  moderation  to  France  and  all  her  de- 
pendants. Would  I  might  see  that  day  I 

Remember  me  duly  to  all  our  dear  friends  around  you. 
We  enjoy  as  good  health  as  this  excessively  severe  climate 
can  be  expected  to  admit.  I  have  received  the  Patriot  down 
only  to  the  4th  of  November,  and  read  its  columns  with 
great  interest  and  pleasure.  The  letter  to  Congress  in  1781 
about  the  invasion  of  Zealand  by  the  English  was  a  prophecy 
just  now  fulfilled.1  Ever  affectionately  yours. 

TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  30  April,  1810. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

««««•«• 

The  reception  which  my  family  and  myself  have  met  here 
has  been  everything  that  we  could  desire.  The  disposition 
of  the  Emperor  towards  the  United  States  was  manifested 
in  the  strongest  and  most  friendly  terms  by  him  at  my  first 
audience,  and  has  been  frequently  repeated  by  his  principal 
minister,  the  Chancellor,  Count  Romanzoff,  from  that  time 
to  the  present.  The  personal  attentions  which  we  have  re- 
ceived have  been  so  numerous,  that  with  my  habits  and 
feelings,  the  only  cause  of  complaint  has  been  the  mode  of 
life  in  which  they  have  necessarily  involved  us,  a  mode  of  life, 
for  which  neither  the  taste  nor  the  constitutions  of  most  of 
us  were  suited.  At  the  hazard  of  giving  offence  by  denying 
a  great  proportion  of  the  hospitable  civilities  crowded  upon 
us,  I  have  extricated  myself  from  a  course  of  dissipation  in 
which  we  should  otherwise  have  been  inevitably  involved, 

JThe  letter  is  dated  January  i,  1781,  and  is  in  the  Boston  Patriot,  November  4, 
1809,  but  is  not  in  the  Works  of  John  Adams. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  425 

and  which  is  as  incompatible  with  the  habits  of  industry  to 
which  I  have  been  used,  as  with  those  of  economy,  which  my 
situation  so  imperiously  imposes  upon  us. 

Of  the  continuance  of  these  amicable  dispositions  towards 
my  country  I  still  receive  frequent  marks  by  communica- 
tions from  the  Chancellor,  nor  have  I  any  reason  to  appre- 
hend any  unfavorable  change,  as  long  as  this  government 
shall  follow  the  impulsion  of  its  principles  and  interests. 
The  Emperor  and  his  ministers  are  thoroughly  convinced 
that  all  the  relations  existing  between  the  United  States  and 
this  country  are  beneficial  to  Russia;  that  they  are  already 
important,  and  susceptible  of  being  made  much  more  so. 
But  how  far  these  sentiments  may  be  found  to  yield  occa- 
sionally to  a  French  or  English  influence,  is  beyond  my  power 
of  anticipation  to  say.  They  arose  and  acquired  their 
strength  in  opposition  to  an  English  influence,  which  for 
many  years  predominated  at  this  court  with  irresistible 
power.  It  is  now  not  at  all  favored  by  a  French  influence, 
almost  as  overruling,  an  influence,  which  instead  of  being 
impaired  by  the  new  alliance  of  France  with  Austria,  will  ac- 
quire additional  vigor  from  it. 

The  marriage  of  the  French  Emperor  with  the  Austrian 
Archduchess  is  an  event  which  has  occasioned  great  joy 
throughout  the  continent  of  Europe.  The  people,  who  every- 
where were  shuddering  with  the  anticipation  of  the  rivers  of 
their  blood  which  might  yet  flow  to  swell  the  great  deep  of  the 
conqueror  Napoleon's  triumphs,  now  flatter  themselves  that 
this  ocean  will  crave  no  more  supplies.  It  must  be  the  fer- 
vent prayer  of  humanity  that  this  hope  may  be  realized. 
But  the  bond  of  marriage  is  a  feeble  tie  in  the  way  of  ambi- 
tion, and  if  it  had  ever  proved  strong,  Napoleon  has  already 
shown  the  world  what  account  he  makes  of  it.  The  tend- 
ency of  this  transaction  to  establish  and  consolidate  his 


426  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

power  is  to  my  mind  more  obvious,  or  rather  more  certain, 
than  of  its  securing  tranquillity  to  the  world.  This  idea  has 
been  expressed  more  ingeniously  in  the  motto  of  an  illumina- 
tion at  Amsterdam  than  I  have  seen  it  anywhere  else. 
"Pax  Thalami,  Pax  Orbis  erit."  But  in  this  promise  I  am 
afraid  the  remaining  subjects  of  the  king  of  Holland  will  find 
themselves  as  much  disappointed,  as  in  their  project  of  pre- 
serving their  national  independence  by  accepting  a  brother 
of  the  great  Napoleon  for  their  king.  The  nuptial  torch  is 
not  formed  to  extinguish  the  fires  of  conquest.  For  my  own 
part  I  perceive  no  refuge  from  the  past,  present  and  future 
miseries  of  mankind,  but  in  the  doctrine  of  the  optimist: 

If  storms  and  earthquakes  break  not  Heaven's  design, 
Why  then  a  Borgia  or  a  Cataline? 

One  of  the  greatest  admirers  of  this  extraordinary  per- 
sonage, not  long  since  expressed  to  me  a  serious  apprehension 
that  he  would  some  day  lay  claim  to  worship  from  mankind, 
as  a  being  of  a  superior  species.  Observing  that  I  smiled  at 
his  alarm,  he  assured  me  from  his  own  personal  knowledge  of 
the  man  that  he  does  entertain  this  idea  of  himself,  and  has 
repeatedly  manifested  a  propensity  to  give  it  out  to  the 
world.  He  has,  indeed,  the  example  of  Alexander,  and  still 
more  that  of  Mahomet,  before  him;  and  notwithstanding  we 
live  in  an  age  so  enlightened,  I  am  not  sure  that  if  he  chose  to 
proclaim  himself  a  deity,  like  Alexander,  or  a  prophet,  like 
Mahomet,  he  would  not  have  eight  hundred  thousand  sol- 
diers ready  to  propagate  his  faith  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet 
throughout  the  habitable  world.  I  can  only  hope  that 
among  the  mysterious  dispensations  of  providence  is  not  in- 
cluded that  of  permitting  a  fifth  part  of  the  human  race  to 
prostrate  themselves  in  adoration  before  the  god  Bonaparte. 
The  transition  from  infidelity  to  fanaticism  is  as  easy  and  as 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  427 

natural  as  that  from  unbounded  democracy  to  despotism,  a 
transition  of  which  France  is  exhibiting  so  glorious  a  demon- 
stration. I  believe  nobody  will  now  deny,  that  the  time  has 
come  which  you  foretold,  when  nobody  would  believe  you, 
that  the  very  name  of  republicanism  is  more  detested  in 
France  than  that  of  monarchy  ever  was  at  the  moment  of 
its  destruction.  This  hatred  of  republics  is  not  without  its 
influence  in  producing  the  treatment  which  we  experience 
from  France,  which  will  continue  as  long  as  we  suffer  the 
same  sort  of  treatment  from  England,  if  not  as  long  as  our 
merchants  continue  to  furnish  gratuitously  temptation  and 
gratification  to  the  spirit  of  plunder.  I  am,  etc. 


TO  JOSEPH  PITCAIRN 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  8  May,  1810. 

MY  DEAR  SIR: 

I  received  by  the  last  mail  your  favor  of  21  April,  which 
contains  much  interesting  information,  for  which  I  give  you 
my  thanks.  I  had  also  duly  received  your  letters  of  26  Jan- 
uary and  9  February,  to  which  I  have  not  hitherto  replied, 
partly  owing  to  an  indisposition  which  confined  me  for  some 
weeks,  and  partly  from  a  dearth  of  any  information  to  re- 
turn, which  could  be  interesting  to  you. 

I  shall  take  such  steps  with  respect  to  the  subjects  men- 
tioned in  your  last,  as  may  be  answerable  to  your  intentions 
as  well  with  regard  to  the  Prussian  government  as  concern- 
ing your  own  affair.  The  conduct  of  France  towards  the 
United  States  has  been,  and  continues  to  be,  such  that  I 
have  not  thought  it  advisable  very  assiduously  to  cultivate 
the  acquaintance  of  the  French  Ambassador  here.  On  one 
occasion,  an  important  one,  I  endeavored  to  engage  his  in- 


428  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

fluence  with  his  government  to  change,  or  at  least  to  mod- 
erate, a  course  of  proceeding  towards  us  equally  unjust  and 
impolitic.  I  found  his  own  dispositions  favorable,  and  I 
have  no  reason  to  believe  them  altered;  but  his  influence 
with  his  government  is  itself  perhaps  not  very  great,  unless 
upon  subjects  within  the  province  of  his  office,  and  he  was 
not  willing  to  make  himself  responsible  for  anything  which 
might  seem  to  counteract  its  general  policy.  Under  these 
circumstances  it  will,  perhaps,  be  some  time  before  I  can 
have  an  opportunity  to  speak  to  him  upon  your  business  in 
a  manner  which  may  be  of  any  service  to  you,  but  if  the  oc- 
casion should  present  itself,  you  may  rely  upon  everything 
on  my  part  which  a  sense  of  justice,  as  well  as  of  an  unabated 
and  ardent  desire  to  serve  you,  can  suggest. 

The  political  and  commercial  relations  between  France 
and  the  United  States  are  doubtless  in  a  very  unfavorable 
and  unpromising  condition.  The  measures  of  France,  I  be- 
lieve, will  rather  irritate  than  terrify  our  countrymen,  and 
fifty  per  cent l  may  be  still  a  fortunate  rate  of  ransom  for  the 
individuals  who  can  extricate  themselves  by  that  sacrifice. 
The  tenth  article  of  the  late  treaty  between  France  and 
Holland  speaks  as  unequivocally  the  disposition  of  France 
towards  the  United  States,  as  the  condemnations  in  France, 
Spain,  Naples  and  Trieste,  on  the  allegation  that  French 
vessels  are  so  treated  in  the  United  States. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  learn  that  the  property  which  had 
been  sequestered  in  Holstein  has  been  principally  restored. 
The  new  Danish  ordinance  for  the  regulation  of  privateers 
gives  me  some  uneasiness,  though  it  is  represented  as  a 
moderating  qualification  of  the  former  law. 

The  dispositions  of  the  government  here  continue  to  be 

1  Levying  a  duty  of  fifty  per  cent  ad  valorem  on  colonial  produce  actually  in 
Holland. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  429 

favorable  and  friendly  towards  the  United  States.  A  great 
number  of  arrivals  from  America  is  expected  as  soon  as  the 
navigation  shall  be  open.  The  Neva  remains  yet  frozen 
over,  which  so  late  in  the  season  is  almost  unexampled.  It 
cannot,  however,  last  many  days  longer.  I  am,  etc. 


TO  WILLIAM  EUSTIS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  10  May,  1810. 

MY  DEAR  SIR: 

I  send  you  together  with  this  letter  some  additional  in- 
formation respecting  the  cultivation  of  hemp  in  this  country, 
together  with  a  long  extract  from  a  French  treatise  on  the 
same  subject,  furnished  me  by  a  friend  here  in  answer  to 
the  questions  of  General  Hampton.  It  appears  that  there 
are  no  machines  in  use  for  the  preparation  of  this  plant  in 
Russia,  other  than  those  which  are  well  known  throughout 
the  United  States,  and  which  are  applied  to  flax  as  much  as 
to  hemp. 

I  write  you  now  in  daily  expectation  that  the  breaking  up 
of  the  river  Neva  will  restore  the  possibility  of  navigation 
between  this  country  and  ours.  Twelve  or  thirteen  other 
American  vessels,  besides  that  in  which  I  came  from  America, 
have  been  detained  here  through  the  long  period  of  a  Russian 
winter,  unusually  protracted  to  this  time,  and  wait  only  for 
the  moving  of  the  waters  to  take  their  departure.  I  wish 
they  may  all  arrive  safe  at  the  places  of  their  destination, 
but  they  are  all  exposed  to  the  danger  at  least  of  Danish 
privateers.  The  proceedings  of  Denmark  during  the  last 
year  in  relation  to  the  commerce  of  the  United  States  must 
be  well  known  to  you.  The  depredations  of  their  privateers 
were  so  excessive,  that  before  the  close  of  the  last  summer  a 


430  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

royal  order  was  issued  revoking  all  their  commissions.  A 
new  ordinance  has,  however,  just  been  promulgated  con- 
taining a  new  set  of  regulations,  or  rather  some  slight  modifi- 
cations under  which  they  were  authorized  heretofore,  but 
the  effect  of  which  beyond  all  doubt  will  be  the  capture  and 
condemnation  of  a  great  additional  mass  of  American  prop- 
erty. 

Besides  the  individual  American  sufferers,  who  have  been 
involuntarily  detained  to  claim  the  justice  of  the  Danish  gov- 
ernment upon  their  own  cases,  Mr.  George  Joy  and  Mr. 
Forbes  have  spent  the  winter  at  Copenhagen,  endeavoring 
to  give  something  like  official  weight  to  their  representations. 
The  consul  of  the  United  States  there,  Mr.  Saabye,  being 
himself  a  Danish  subject,  partner  of  a  commercial  house 
which  probably  transacts  business  for  the  government,  has 
been  thought  by  most  of  our  unfortunate  countrymen  who 
needed  the  benefit  of  his  interposition,  not  so  warm  in  his 
zeal  or  so  active  in  his  exertions  for  them  as  the  duties  of  his 
office  required.  But  it  is  very  much  to  be  doubted  whether 
any  merely  pacific  representations  would  suffice,  to  over- 
power the  impulses  under  which  the  Danish  depredations 
upon  our  commerce  have  been  committed. 

Denmark  has  suffered  extremely  by  the  war  in  which  she 
was  so  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  involved.  Her  commerce 
has  been  almost  annihilated.  The  most  profitable  source  of 
her  revenues  has  been  nearly  drained,  and  she  has  been  com- 
pelled to  maintain  an  army  far  more  numerous  than  her 
population  can  bear,  but  which  so  long  as  the  island  of  Zea- 
land is  not  invaded,  is  a  burden  as  useless  as  it  is  oppressive. 

A  small  English  squadron  has  been  stationed  at  the  pas- 
sage of  the  Sound,  which  has  suffered  scarcely  any  neutral 
vessels  to  go  through  there.  The  navigation  and  commerce 
of  the  Baltic  have  been  thus  forced  through  the  channel  of 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  431 

the  Belt,  and  Denmark  has  lost  the  duties  which  for  many 
ages  she  has  been  accustomed  to  levy  upon  the  passage  of 
the  Sound.  Most  of  the  American  vessels  which  have  come 
into  the  Baltic  during  the  last  season  have  passed  through 
the  Belt,  either  by  their  own  preference  to  save  the  Sound 
duties,  or  to  take  the  benefit  of  the  English  convoys,  which 
has  always  very  readily  been  allowed,  or  finally,  because 
upon  presenting  themselves  at  the  entrance  of  the  Sound, 
they  have  been  stopped  by  the  blockading  squadron,  and 
had  no  choice  left  but  to  come  through  the  Belt  or  abandon 
the  voyage.  In  passing  by  the  Belt,  and  even  in  taking 
English  convoy,  the  Americans  have  had  no  idea  of  violating 
the  laws  of  neutrality,  but  the  Danes  entertain  a  different 
opinion.  This  circumstance  has  exasperated  them  not  only 
against  the  individual  transgressors,  but  has  stimulated 
them  to  animosity  against  our  nation  itself.  Many  Ameri- 
cans have  navigated  under  British  licenses.  Several  British 
vessels  have  been  detected  in  attempts  to  trade  under 
American  colors  with  forged  papers.  Almost  all  the  cor- 
responding merchants  and  consignees  of  Americans  in  Den- 
mark, and  generally  in  the  north  of  Europe,  are  English 
houses,  or  houses  in  time  of  peace  engaged  in  extensive  trade 
with  England.  Add  to  all  this  the  temptation  afforded  by 
the  richness  of  the  spoil,  and  the  security  felt  from  the  pre- 
vailing opinion,  that  it  is  utterly  defenceless,  together  with 
the  sharp  and  incessant  instigations  of  France,  and  you  may 
conclude  what  prospects  await  most  of  the  American  vessels 
which  will  swarm  to  the  Baltic  the  ensuing  summer. 

Among  the  slight  and  mutilated  accounts  which  come  to 
us  from  America  through  the  medium  of  French,  English  and 
German  newspapers  we  have  heard  of  a  bill  or  resolution 
proposed  in  Congress  by  Mr.  Burwell,  for  authorizing  con- 
voys for  our  vessels,  and  also  for  permitting  them  to  be 


432  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

armed  and  to  defend  themselves  against  privateers.1  I  am 
persuaded  that  some  provision  of  this  kind  would  be  attended 
by  the  best  consequences.  There  are  very  few,  if  any,  Eng- 
lish privateers  out,  and  as  the  measure  does  not  propose 
resistance  against  national  ships  of  the  belligerents,  it  would 
not  probably  produce  any  additional  collision  with  England. 
There  would  doubtless  be  occasional  captures  by  French 
privateers,  but  not  so  many  as  there  are  in  the  present  state 
of  things,  and  they  would  probably  not  fare  worse.  But 
against  the  Danish  privateering  system  it  would  give  a 
defense  altogether  adequate  to  the  need.  The  numbers  and 
the  force  of  the  British  armed  vessels  on  all  the  Danish  coasts 
are  such,  that  no  Danish  privateer  of  any  considerable  force 
can  be  fitted  out  and  keep  the  sea.  The  privateers  which 
molested  our  navigation  so  much  last  summer,  and  those 
which  I  fear  will  prove  most  pernicious  in  the  next,  are  mere 
sail  boats,  often  without  a  deck  or  even  a  cannon,  which  sally 
from  the  harbors  just  as  our  vessels  are  passing  before  them, 
and  take  them  only  because  the  authority  to  resist  is  not 
allowed  to  the  American. 

There  have  been  serious  and  repeated  propositions  made 
by  France  to  England  for  opening  a  negotiation  for  a  general 
peace.  The  Austrian  Prime  Minister,  Count  Metternich,2 
has  been  some  time  at  Paris,  and  through  him  I  understand 
the  mediation  of  Austria  has  been  formally  renewed  to  the 
British  government.  There  appears,  however,  a  great  aver- 
sion to  peace  in  England,  and  this  aversion  is  not  confined  to 
the  ministerial  party.  They  do  not  yet  consider  the  cause  of 
Ferdinand  VII  in  Spain  as  so  desperate,  that  they  would  be 
justified  in  abandoning  their  recent  treaties  in  his  favor. 
The  account  of  affairs  in  Spain  will  reach  you  as  soon  and 

1  Annals  of  Congress,  nth  Cong.,  i.  1225. 

2  Clemens  Wenzeslas,  Prince  Metternich  (1773-1859). 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  433 

as  near  the  truth  as  they  come  here.  The  European  con- 
tinent and  the  British  islands  exhibit  newspapers  corre- 
sponding to  those  of  our  parties  in  America.  The  gazettes 
of  this  continent,  without  exception,  are  little  else  than 
extracts  from  the  Moniteur  and  the  Journal  de  P  Empire. 
They  say  precisely  everything  which  the  French  government 
intends  should  be  said,  and  nothing  more.  The  English 
papers  with  some  variety  and  much  opposition  between 
themselves,  owing  to  a  remnant  of  liberty  left  to  their  press, 
say  little  or  nothing  of  foreign  affairs  but  what  their  govern- 
ment chooses  should  be  said.  Almost  all  their  news  from  the 
continent  is  false,  The  French  practice  of  suppressing  every- 
thing which  happens  unfavorable  to  them  produces,  however, 
numerous  reports  of  such  events,  which  circulate  in  whispers, 
and  which  are  often  unfounded  or  exaggerated.  It  is  now 
currently  reported  here  that  they  have  been  defeated  in 
Spain,  on  the  frontiers  of  Portugal,  and  that  they  will  be 
obliged  to  raise  the  siege  of  Cadiz.  If  there  is  any  material 
foundation  for  these  rumors,  the  reluctance  of  the  British  to 
a  negotiation  for  peace  will  be  stronger  than  ever.  I  am,  etc. 


TO  GEORGE  JOY 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  n  May,  1810. 

SIR: 

I  have  successively  received  your  favors  of  16  March,  10, 
14  and  17  April,  with  the  original  and  English  translation  of 
the  late  Danish  ordinance  for  the  regulation  of  privateers. 
Your  letter  of  April  14  came  to  hand  not  until  yesterday, 
though  that  of  the  i/th,  with  the  translation  of  the  instruc- 
tions, had  been  received  by  the  preceding  post.  I  answer  all 
these  letters  at  once,  not  because  the  contents  of  each  of 


434  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

them  did  not  require  from  their  interesting  character  a  sep- 
arate answer,  but  because,  understanding  that  the  clerks  of 
the  post  office  at  Copenhagen  are  admitted  as  third  parties 
to  the  confidence  of  all  private  correspondence  which  passes 
through  their  hands,  I  have  not  been  willing  to  add  to  the 
severity  of  their  duty  the  trouble  of  perusing  letters,  which 
would  afford  them  so  little  amusement  as  those  which  I 
might  have  written  you. 

That  the  king  of  Denmark,  his  ministers  and  his  people 
should  be  extremely  exasperated  against  England,  is  not 
only  natural  but  perfectly  just.  Among  the  examples  of 
political  profligacy  and  wanton  outrage  which  the  European 
nations  for  the  last  half  century  have  rendered  so  familiar, 
the  British  attack  upon  Copenhagen,  as  far  as  I  have  been 
able  to  estimate  its  merits,  stands  at  the  very  pinnacle  of 
infamy.  From  the  little  opportunity  which  I  had  during 
the  last  autumn  to  witness  the  feelings  of  his  Danish  maj- 
esty's subjects  in  Norway,  and  even  in  the  island  of  Soelland 
[Zealand],  if  anything  struck  me  with  peculiar  force,  it  was 
the  little  sensibility  manifested  upon  that  atrocious  act.  For 
however  the  Russian  government  may  be  suspected  of 
connivance  at  the  trade  carried  on  to  so  great  an  extent  be- 
tween this  country  and  England,  they  could  at  least  retort, 
that  the  Danish  dominions  have  to  their  full  proportion 
participated  in  the  same  trade. 

It  appears  to  me  also  that  proof  more  unequivocal  might 
be  given  of  a  sincere  and  just  resentment  against  England, 
than  by  measures  specially  and  avowedly  pointed  against 
Russia  and  the  United  States. 

Whether  the  new  instructions  have  in  their  original  lan- 
guage more  precision  than  their  predecessors,  I  am  not 
qualified  to  judge.  In  the  translation  which  you  have  been 
kind  enough  to  present  me  I  find  anything  but  precision. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  435 

The  renewal  of  privateering  under  any  instructions  speaks  a 
language  too  intelligible  to  us  Americans,  who  know  that  the 
really  British  trade  is  too  well  protected  to  fall  within  the 
grasp  of  Danish  privateers. 

It  is  a  circumstance  which  gave  me  not  less  surprise  than 
pain  to  learn  that  Count  Bernstorff  so  positively  assured 
you,  not  only  before  the  ordinance  issued,  that  taking  Brit- 
ish convoy  would  be  cause  for  suspicion  and  not  for  con- 
demnation, but  even  after  it  was  public,  that  such  was  the 
regulation.  It  justifies  if  not  requires  inferences  which  I  am 
not  unwilling  to  make.  As  to  the  principle  itself,  I  believe 
it  to  be  entirely  new  and  not  justifiable  upon  the  application 
of  any  ancient  principle  of  national  law.  Equitably  con- 
sidered, no  doubt  taking  hostile  convoy  affords  ground  of 
suspicion,  but  it  neither  makes  the  ship  enemy's  property, 
nor  loads  it  with  contraband.  It  is,  therefore,  virtually  an 
inconsistency  to  say  in  one  section,  that  a  friend's  ship  shall 
protect  the  cargo  of  an  enemy,  and  in  another  than  an 
enemy's  convoy  shall  be  cause  for  confiscating  a  friend's 
ship. 

With  respect  to  the  remainder  of  this  ordinance  the  fol- 
lowing observations  have  occurred  to  me.  I.  The  bonds  re- 
quired to  be  given  by  the  owners  of  privateers  are  so  trifling 
that,  as  a  security  against  misconduct,  they  might  as  well  give 
none;  1000  rix-dollars  are  not  more  than  equivalent  to  300 
dollars  American  currency;  15,000  rix-dollars  is  the  maximum 
to  be  required.  If  that  had  been  prescribed  on  the  con- 
trary as  the  lowest  sum,  it  would  scarcely  have  been  ade- 
quate. If  the  translation  is  correct,  the  owners  of  the  pri- 
vateers are  not  even  responsible  in  their  property  (excepting 
the  privateer  itself)  for  damage  done  to  the  captured  ship. 

2.  Among  the  papers  enumerated  as  necessary  for  the 
neutral  vessel  are  two  at  least,  which  are  not  customary  on 


436  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

board  American  vessels,  and  which  many  of  them  will  not 
possess,  viz.  a  bill  of  gauge  (distinct  from  the  certificate  con- 
tained in  the  register),  and  a  receipt  for  having  paid  the  cus- 
tom or  duty.  The  former  Danish  privateering  laws  required 
a  bill  of  measurement,  but  as  that  is  always  included  in  our 
registers  the  courts  must  have  taken  that  as  sufficient.  The 
new  ordinance  requires  it  as  a  separate  paper,  and  that  it 
should  agree  with  the  measurement  in  the  register.  In  the 
former  law  the  custom  house  clearance  was  required;  but 
how  can  a  receipt  for  the  payment  of  duties  be  exhibited 
when  no  duties  have  been  paid?  Our  constitutional  laws 
do  not  allow  duties  to  be  levied  upon  exportation.  The 
ship's  journal  is  also  a  document  which  was  not  required  by 
the  former  law.  Possibly  the  difference  in  the  two  other 
cases  is  in  the  translation,  and  not  in  the  original  language. 
It  is  not  to  be  presumed  that  the  Danish  government  in- 
tended to  prescribe  papers  which  they  know  our  ships  do  not 
possess,  and  to  authorize  the  capture  of  all  vessels  not  pos- 
sessing them.  Especially  when  neither  of  the  papers  can 
be  material  to  the  neutrality. 

3.  In  §  14,  the  privateer  is  authorized  to  compel  the  com- 
mander of  the  neutral  vessel  to  come  on  board  of  him  with 
the  ship's  documents.  This  is  also  in  the  former  ordinance, 
but  is  it  consistent  with  the  law  of  nations  or  with  equity? 
The  right  of  the  belligerents,  and  no  nation  knows  this  better 
than  the  Danes,  is  merely  a  right  to  search  the  neutral.  He 
has  no  right  to  order  the  captain  of  the  neutral  out  of  his 
ship,  nor  to  separate  the  ship  from  her  papers.  Both  these 
things  are  extremely  inconvenient  and  dangerous  to  the 
neutral.  If  I  am  not  misinformed,  there  is  even  now  at 
Copenhagen  an  American  vessel  of  unquestionable  neutral- 
ity, condemned  in  the  first  instance  and  in  danger  of  being 
so  upon  the  appeal,  because  in  the  most  imminent  peril  of 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  437 

shipwreck  her  papers  were  transported  into  another  vessel, 
and  could  not  afterwards  be  recovered. 

4.  By  §  23,  the  neutral  vessel  carried  into  port  is  liable, 
even  upon  the  first  examination  of  the  magistrate,  to  be  un- 
loaded, if  the  privateer  insists  upon  it.  This  is  not  in  the 
former  ordinance,  and  you  can  judge  to  what  excessive 
abuses  such  a  license  is  liable  by  privateersmen,  who  may 
be  under  1000  rix-dollar  bonds,  and  not  worth  another 
thousand  in  the  world. 

I  know  not  whether  you  will  have  any  opportunity  to  urge 
these  objections  in  a  manner  which  can  have  any  influence 
in  producing  their  removal.  The  deepest  injury  we  have 
heretofore  suffered,  as  you  remark,  has  not  been  owing  to  the 
law,  but  to  the  constant  violation  of  every  law  by  the  pri- 
vateers —  to  the  extraordinary  proceedings  of  the  courts, 
and  to  the  utter  impunity  of  the  privateersmen,  even  of 
those  whose  outrages  were  most  destitute  of  every  shadow  of 
pretence. 

What  Count  BernstorrFs  information  may  be,  which  leads 
him  to  believe  that  we  are  upon  the  eve  of  an  adjustment 
with  England,  is  not  for  me  to  say;  that  such  an  adjustment 
will  take  place  appears  to  me  very  probable,  but  I  neither 
believe  nor  fear  that  it  will  be  followed  by  any  additional 
hostilities  of  France  towards  us.  France  and  her  allies, 
Denmark  included,  have  been  laboring  to  the  utmost  of  their 
power  to  reconcile  us  with  England.  For  this  we  owe  them 
no  obligations.  Their  services  are  like  that  of  the  man,  who 
in  aiming  a  dagger  at  the  heart  of  his  friend,  opened  an  ab- 
scess, and  saved  his  life.  If  England  has  the  sense  to  offer 
us  terms  which  it  is  possible  to  accept  with  honor,  France 
and  Denmark  too  will  follow  the  example.  For  speaking  of 
France  and  her  allies,  I  must  in  common  candor  make  an 
exception  in  favor  of  Russia.  With  resentments  if  not  quite 


438  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

so  deep,  certainly  as  just  and  as  sincere  as  those  of  Denmark 
against  England,  the  Emperor  of  Russia  hitherto  has  distin- 
guished the  difference  between  English  and  Americans,  be- 
tween inveterate  enemies  and  valuable  friends,  between  war 
against  maritime  usurpation  and  the  plunder  of  lawful 
neutrality. 

The  Emperor  Napoleon  has,  indeed,  shown  not  a  little 
address,  in  bringing  so  much  of  his  cause  at  the  present  period 
of  his  English  war  upon  the  British  Orders  of  Council  of 
November,  1807.  On  this  point  the  British  are  as  unable  to 
answer  his  argument,  as  they  are  to  shake  the  crown  upon 
his  head  by  their  arms.  They  have  put  themselves  in  the 
wrong,  and  he  is  contriving  that  they  shall  not  have  the 
merit  of  treading  back  their  steps  without  humiliation. 
Your  observations  on  the  use  which  may  have  been  made  in 
negotiation  of  this  French  manoeuvre,  are  ingenious,  but 
I  think  the  calculation  of  Napoleon,  or  rather  of  him  whose 
hand  is  visible  in  this  policy,  was  directly  the  contrary.  He 
was  afraid,  as  you  think,  that  England  would  yield  the 
point  to  us,  and  started  our  claim  as  his  own,  to  kindle  Brit- 
ish pride  in  support  of  British  obstinacy  against  yielding  the 
point  at  all.  He  knew  that  whenever  peace  should  be  on  the 
carpet,  this  could  not  in  the  nature  of  things  make  any  ques- 
tion between  him  and  England.  But  he  knew  that  if  England 
gave  up  this,  she  would  instantly  have  all  our  trade  again, 
and  take  from  him  his  pretext  for  plundering  us.  He  under- 
stands the  English  character  well.  I  hope  you  in  this  in- 
stance have  understood  it  still  better.  I  am,  etc. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  439 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

No.  15.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  19  May,  1810. 
SIR: 

•  •••••• 

I  know  not  upon  what  recognized  principle  of  the  laws  of 
nations,  Denmark  can  justify  the  condemnation  of  neutral 
vessels  merely  for  having  occasionally  joined  a  British  con- 
voy. The  only  principle  which  can  give  color  to  such  a  doc- 
trine is  the  British  fiction  that  by  enjoying  a  privilege  granted 
by  an  enemy  which  is  not  allowed  in  time  of  peace,  neutral 
property  is  transmuted  into  the  property  of  the  enemy.  It 
is  however  not  to  be  denied  that  a  belligerent  convoy  is  not 
altogether  compatible  with  the  privileges  and  obligations  of 
neutrality,  and  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  any  of  our  own  ves- 
sels have  found  themselves  under  the  necessity  of  taking  it. 
So  far  as  respects  the  Danes,  if  one  or  two  of  our  own  frigates 
were  stationed  in  the  North  Sea  and  in  the  Baltic,  near  the 
entrance  of  the  passage  on  both  sides  of  the  Belt,  they  would 
be  adequate  to  protect  all  our  merchant  vessels  against 
Danish  privateers.  This  measure  I  am  persuaded  would  be 
attended  with  happy  effects,  not  only  by  protecting  much 
property  which  will  otherwise  be  lost,  but  by  impressing  the 
Danish  government  itself  with  the  idea,  that  the  United 
States  are  not  without  means  of  defending  their  commerce. 
The  spirit  of  rapine,  of  which  England  and  France  are  ex- 
hibiting such  extraordinary  examples,  is  infectious.  Den- 
mark is  suffering  beyond  the  bounds  of  endurance  by  the 
war,  into  which  she  was  so  wantonly  plunged  by  the  aggres- 
sion of  England;  her  active  and  profitable  commerce  is 


440  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

annihilated;  her  fleet  in  possession  of  the  British;  her  rev- 
enues decayed;  her  finances  in  ruin,  compelled  to  maintain 
an  army,  six  times  greater  than  her  population  can  bear,  and 
cut  off  even  by  the  control  of  France,  from  the  advantages 
which  American  merchants  were  pouring  into  her  lap.  In  this 
state  of  national  wretchedness,  and  of  famine,  her  people  see 
from  their  shores  our  ships  richly  laden  sometimes  passing 
under  the  protection  of  her  enemy,  and  in  their  views  of 
things  defrauding  her  of  her  lawful  toll  duties;  and  sometimes 
without  any  protection  at  all,  presenting  a  prey  equally 
tempting  and  easy  to  the  grasp  of  plunder.  Heroic  virtue 
is  not  the  fashion  of  the  age.  The  excitement  is  too  strong 
to  be  resisted.  It  becomes  essential  to  counteract  it  by  ex- 
citing sentiments  of  a  different  description,  and  none  can 
be  so  efficacious,  as  the  assurance  that  the  property  will  be 
defended. 

In  the  midst  of  the  extreme  rigor  with  which  France  is 
interdicting  to  her  allies  all  commerce  with  England,  it  is 
said  from  sources  which  I  believe  to  be  correct,  that  the  direct 
trade  between  France  herself  and  England  by  licenses  has 
become  very  extensive.  The  French  government  grant  li- 
censes to  all  vessels  which  carry  grain,  to  bring  back  any 
cargo,  at  their  owners'  option,  and  on  the  vessel's  return,  no 
questions  are  asked  from  whence  she  came,  but  a  tribute  of 
thirty  per  cent  on  the  value  of  the  cargoes  is  levied  by  the 
government  upon  this  trade.  And  this  is  what  they  call  the 
continental  system.  The  crime  of  Holland,  for  which  a  fifth 
part  of  her  small  population  and  territory  has  been  taken 
from  her,  was  trading  secretly  with  England.  The  Emperor 
Napoleon  uses  no  such  secrecy;  he  licenses  vessels  to  trade 
with  his  own  signature,  and,  ridiculous  as  it  may  appear, 
there  has  been  a  report  in  circulation,  to  which  these  circum- 
stances have  given  some  countenance,  that  France  and 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  441 

England  are  about  to  make  a  treaty  of  commerce  together, 
without  making  peace. 

The  ice  of  the  river  Neva  has  at  length  broken  up,  after 
remaining  later  in  the  season  than  has  been  known  since  the 
foundation  of  the  city.  It  has  not  yet  disappeared  from  the 
Gulf  of  Finland,  even  between  this  place  and  Cronstadt. 
Upwards  of  twenty  American  vessels,  bound  to  various 
ports  on  the  Baltic  have  already  passed  the  Sound,  and  I 
have  heard  already  of  two  carried  in  by  Danish  privateers 
under  the  new  ordinance.  I  have  received  several  applica- 
tions from  persons  desirous  of  being  appointed  consuls  for 
the  United  States  in  Prussian  ports,  some  of  which  are  open 
for  American  vessels.  There  would  be  an  advantage  at  the 
present  times  if  we  had  faithful,  and  active  consuls  at  Memel, 
at  Konigsberg,  and  at  Stettin.  I  say  faithful,  because  they 
would  otherwise  carry  on  English  trade,  for  English  houses, 
and  connive  at  or  support  the  London  manufacture  of 
American  papers;  and  I  say  active,  because  while  France 
pursues  her  continental  system,  in  her  present  manner, 
and  Prussia  is  at  the  mercy  of  France,  seizures  like  those  in 
Schleswig  and  Holstein,  or  articles  in  treaties  like  the  tenth 
of  that  between  France  and  Holland,  could  not  be  prevented, 
and  might  occur  from  one  day  to  another.  The  consul 
should  have  the  talent  of  discerning  the  symptoms  which  in- 
dicate the  approach  of  such  measures,  and  if  duly  active 
might  in  a  great  degree  succeed  in  neutralizing  their  effects. 

I  have  the  honor,  etc. 


442  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

No.  16.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  25  May,  1810. 

SIR: 

Mr.  Heard  1  of  Boston  arrived  here  a  few  days  since,  hav- 
ing travelled  over  land  from  Constantinople.  He  has  given 
me  some  further  information  respecting  the  American  vessels 
which  had  been  admitted  there.  They  were  only  two;  one 
of  which  was  the  brig  from  Baltimore,  which  proceeded  to 
Odessa,  and  the  other  still  remains  at  Constantinople.  Mr. 
Heard  informs  me  that  a  representation  from  the  Americans, 
as  well  at  Constantinople  as  at  Smyrna,  has  been  forwarded 
to  the  President  of  the  United  States,  setting  forth  the  public 
advantage  which  might  be  derived  from  a  treaty  of  commerce 
with  the  Ottoman  Porte,  and  the  inconveniences  and  vexa- 
tions suffered  by  the  Americans,  who  without  the  protection 
of  such  a  treaty  have  obtained  access  into  the  Sultan's 
dominions.  Undoubtedly  the  free  admission  to  the  naviga- 
tion of  the  Black  Sea  would  open  a  new  source  of  prosperity 
to  the  industry  and  enterprise  of  our  country.  I  have  al- 
ready had  the  honor  to  inform  you  of  the  favorable  light 
in  which  this  object  is  considered  here,  and  I  now  enclose  an 
article  extracted  from  the  gazette  of  this  city,  which  was 
certainly  not  inserted  without  the  approbation  of  the  gov- 
ernment, and  which  contains  another  manifestation  of  the 
same  sentiments,  which  have  been  officially  expressed  by 
the  Chancellor,  Count  RomanzofF.  At  present,  the  Amer- 
icans who  reach  Constantinople,  or  even  Smyrna,  are  obliged 
to  put  themselves  under  the  protection  of  some  European 

1  John  R.  Kurd. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  443 

government,  and  to  assume  their  flag.  The  usual  circum- 
stances, which  in  all  foreign  countries  assimilate  our  people 
to  the  English,  have  in  general  induced  them  to  seek  the 
protection  of  that  flag,  when  they  could  obtain  it,  and  it 
has  not  been  gratuitously  or  very  liberally  bestowed.  Mr. 
Heard  says  that  the  good  offices  of  the  Swedish  charge  des 
affaires  finally  obtained  the  admission  of  the  two  American 
vessels,  and  that  no  small  part  of  the  opposition  which  they 
had  previously  met  proceeded  from  the  English  minister. 
There  is  a  greater  disposition  of  indulgence  and  amity  at 
Constantinople  towards  Sweden,  than  perhaps  towards  any 
other  European  nation.  The  origin  of  which  may  be  traced 
to  a  common  fear  of  Russia.  The  Swedish  treaty  with  the 
Porte  is  said  to  secure  to  the  subjects  of  that  kingdom  ex- 
traordinary privileges,  and  is  recommended  as  a  model  for 
that  which  is  desired  to  be  obtained  for  the  United  States. 
Mr.  Palin,  the  Swedish  charge  des  affaires,  gave  Mr.  Heard  a 
letter  for  Count  Stedingk,  the  ambassador  of  his  nation  at 
this  court;  in  which  he  mentions  what  he  had  done  in  favor 
of  these  Americans,  and  that  he  had  given  notice  of  it  to  the 
king  of  Sweden,  and  requested  his  permission  to  extend  the 
same  good  offices  further,  until  the  United  States  should 
have  a  treaty  with  the  Porte.  With  respect  to  this  last  ob- 
ject he  adds,  that  its  success  will  in  a  great  measure  depend 
upon  the  observance  of  secrecy,  alluding  I  presume  to  the 
opposition  which  I  have  already  mentioned,  and  perhaps  to 
that  of  other  Europeans  besides  the  English.  For  at  Con- 
stantinople, as  in  the  states  of  Barbary,  as  the  admission  of 
any  Christian  nation  to  commercial  access  is  in  the  nature 
of  an  exclusive  privilege,  they  who  already  possess  it  con- 
sider it  as  a  general  principle  of  policy,  as  far  as  they  are  able, 
to  prevent  the  admission  of  a  new  comer,  to  participate  in 
the  benefit.  With  regard  to  France  also,  at  the  present 


444  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

juncture  we  must  expect  all  the  ill  offices  that  her  public 
agents  can  employ  against  us  as  well  in  Turkey,  as  else- 
where. 

In  other  respects  perhaps  no  opportunity  could  be  more 
promising  than  the  present,  for  obtaining  a  favorable  treaty 
with  the  Porte.  The  influence  of  France  and  of  England  is, 
as  far  as  I  can  learn,  equally  weak  there.  The  Turks  have 
received  so  many  and  so  great  outrages  from  both  the  par- 
ties that  they  are  equally  exasperated  against  both.  The 
English  minister  has  been  for  several  months  on  the  point  of 
quitting  the  capital,  and  his  departure  has  been  only  delayed 
by  the  refusal  of  the  Sultan,  to  permit  the  frigate,  which  was 
to  take  Mr.  Adair  away,  to  pass  up  to  the  city.  At  the  same 
time,  actual  hostilities  have  taken  place  between  the  Turkish 
and  French  troops,  on  the  frontiers  of  the  territories  ceded 
by  Austria,  in  the  late  treaty  of  peace. 

There  have  been  some  popular  disturbances  at  Con- 
stantinople, and  a  great  fire,  which  destroyed  a  great  part  of 
the  suburb  of  Pera  —  Mr.  Heard  says,  six  thousand  houses. 
This  too  is  considered  as  an  indication  of  discontent  among 
the  people.  But  it  appears  that  a  supply  of  grain  has  been 
obtained  from  Egypt,  and  the  scarcity  to  which  the  commo- 
tions were  attributed  has  been  at  least  in  part  removed.  The 
vessels  which  had  been  chartered  to  fetch  grain  from  Odessa 
were  not  allowed  to  take  it,  the  very  scarcity  which  they 
were  intended  to  remedy  having  occasioned  a  prohibition 
of  exportation  by  the  Duke  de  Richelieu,  the  governor  of  the 
Russian  provinces  in  that  neighborhood.  The  want  of 
exportation,  however,  was  felt  at  Odessa  as  severely  as  the 
want  of  importation  at  Constantinople,  and  I  have  some 
reason  to  believe,  that  the  government  here  and  the  Duke  de 
Richelieu  himself  now  regret  that  the  opportunity  of  so 
profitable  a  trade  has  been  lost.  The  example  of  France, 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  445 

where  in  the  midst  of  all  the  rigor  of  the  continental  sys- 
tem licenses  for  the  exportation  of  grain  to  England  have  not 
only  been  freely  granted,  but  promoted  by  permissions  im- 
plied if  not  expressed  to  bring  back  English  manufactures, 
or  any  thing  else  in  return,  has  strongly  recommended  a 
similar  relaxation  here,  and  if  the  scarcity  at  Constantinople 
should  continue,  or  again  occur,  I  think  the  prohibition  of 
exportation  on  the  Russian  part,  will  not  remain. 

The  hopes  of  peace  between  Russia  and  the  Porte,  are  as 
unpromising  as  of  that  between  France  and  England.  The 
late  commander  in  chief  of  the  Russian  army  against  the 
Turks,  Prince  Bagration,1  since  his  removal  has  not  returned 
to  St.  Petersburg.  His  successor,  General  Kamensky  2  has 
again  crossed  the  Danube,  and  resumed  offensive  operations, 
but  whether  he  will  be  able  to  maintain  them,  is  much 
doubted  by  the  military  men  here,  who  know  the  difficulties 
of  the  country  which  is  the  scene  of  the  war,  and  the  condi- 

• 

tion  of  his  army  suffering,  it  is  said,  severely  by  disease. 

The  occasion  upon  which  the  recent  hostilities  between 
the  Turkish  and  French  troops  on  the  borders  of  Croatia, 
was  a  question  relative  to  boundaries.  By  treaties  between 
Turkey  and  Austria  previous  to  the  late  war  of  the  latter 
with  France,  the  Porte  had  stipulated  to  cede  to  Austria 
certain  fortresses  and  districts  of  territory  bounding  on  the 
province  of  Croatia.  The  influence  of  France,  however,  had 
prevented  the  delivery  of  these  places  into  the  actual  posses- 
sion of  the  Austrians,  these  provinces  having  been  included 
in  the  cessions  from  Austria  to  France,  by  the  late  treaty  of 
peace.  The  French  troops  have  been  ordered  to  take  pos- 
session of  these  places,  which  though  ceded  had  never  been 
delivered  to  the  Austrians.  The  Turks,  were  as  unwilling 

1  Peter  Ivanovitch,  Prince  Bagration  (1762-1812). 

2  Nikolai  Kamenskoi. 


446  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

to  yield  them  to  France  as  to  Austria,  and  made  resistance. 
There  is  an  opinion  entertained  by  some  persons  of  good 
information,  that  a  concert  will  be  formed  between  France, 
Austria,  and  Russia,  under  which  the  Ottoman  Empire  will 
entirely  sink.  I  do  not  think  this  probable,  from  the  present 
symptoms  in  the  political  relations  of  these  powers.  There 
is  yet  a  manifest  coolness  between  the  cabinets  of  St.  Peters- 
burg and  Vienna;  nor  can  it  be  doubted,  however  it  may  be 
denied,  that  in  the  present  honeymoon  of  the  new  alliance 
between  France  and  Austria,  the  more  ancient  but  less  in- 
timate ties  between  France  and  Russia  have  experienced 
some  relaxation. 

By  the  last  accounts  from  Copenhagen,  I  learn,  that  two 
American  vessels,  after  having  passed  at  Elsineur,  and  paid 
the  Sound  duties  have  been  taken  by  Danish  privateers  and 
carried  into  Copenhagen.  An  order  from  that  government 
has  also  been  issued  prohibiting  the  publication  of  the 
Sound  lists,  as  has  always  been  customary.  The  object  of 
this  last  measure  is  not  apparent.  Several  English  ships  of 
war  have  already  passed  through  the  Belt  into  the  Baltic, 
where  it  is  reported  that  a  fleet  of  twenty  sail  of  the  line 
are  to  be  sent.  From  this  force  a  new  expedition  against  the 
island  of  Zealand  has  been  inferred  as  probable.  If  really 
intended,  you  will  hear  of  it  more  directly  from  another 
quarter. 

I  remain,  etc. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  447 

TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  6  June,  1810. 
MY  DEAR  MOTHER: 

Captain  Thomas  of  the  Express,  a  vessel  belonging  to  Mr. 
W.  R.  Gray,  arrived  here  a  few  days  ago,  and  brought  me 
your  kind  favor  of  31  December  and  12  January.  It  was 
the  second  letter  from  you  that  I  have  had  the  pleasure  of 
receiving,  and  after  several  months  of  expectation  gave  me 
new  reason  for  rejoicing  at  the  final  release  of  these  regions 
from  the  chains  of  winter. 

The  ship  Horace,  Captain  Bickford,  to  which  and  to  whom 
we  are  indebted  for  bringing  us  safely  hither,  after  having 
been  locked  up  nearly  eight  months  by  the  ice,  is  now  about 
to  sail  upon  her  return  home.  Her  voyage  hitherto  has  been 
upon  the  whole  highly  prosperous,  though,  as  you  have 
learnt  from  my  letters  to  my  brother,  not  without  imminent 
perils,  which  with  the  blessing  of  providence  we  escaped,  and 
though  during  the  winter  the  captain  has  had  the  misfortune 
to  lose  three  of  his  men  by  the  smallpox.  How  she  will 
accomplish  her  return  voyage  is  yet  in  the  bosom  of  futurity. 
She  has  all  my  good  wishes  and  prayers  for  her  safety.  .  .  . 

The  failure  of  Mr.  Jackson's  mission  was  naturally  to  be 
expected,  as  well  from  the  transactions  between  the  Ameri- 
can and  British  governments  which  had  immediately  pre- 
ceded it,  as  from  the  known  character  of  the  negotiator. 
What  have  been  the  proceedings  of  the  British  cabinet  to- 
wards America  since  they  have  been  informed  of  that  event, 
I  do  not  know.  The  king's  speech  to  Parliament  professed  a 
pacific  disposition  towards  the  United  States,  but  there  has 
been  no  relaxation  of  the  British  maritime  system,  as  it  was 
modified  by  the  Orders  in  Council  of  April,  1809,  and  it  is 
said  that  Mr.  Jackson  has  not  been  recalled. 


448  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

The  Marquis  Wellesley,  who  is  now  the  English  Minister 
of  Foreign  Affairs,  appears  in  his  political  system  not  to 
differ  much  from  Mr.  Canning.  Neither  of  them  has  dis- 
covered the  disposition  upon  which  alone  any  peace  is  to  be 
expected  in  Europe,  or  upon  the  ocean.  France,  on  the 
other  hand,  and  all  the  states  directly  under  her  influence 
and  control,  have  been  heaping  the  measure  of  outrage  and 
injury  to  our  commerce.  They  have  not  only  condemned 
and  confiscated  our  vessels  and  their  cargoes  in  France,  in 
Spain,  and  in  Naples,  but  they  have  formally  stipulated  by 
treaty,  that  the  American  property  imported  into  Holland 
since  the  first  of  January,  1809,  shall  be  placed  at  the  disposi- 
tion of  the  French  Emperor,  according  to  the  relations  be- 
tween France  and  the  United  States.  France,  too,  has 
adopted  the  English  practice  of  giving  licenses,  and  levying 
upon  them  an  enormous  tax.  In  this  substitute  for  neutral 
trade  both  these  nations,  or  rather  their  governments,  find 
their  account  so  well,  that  I  see  no  prospect  of  any  tolerated 
neutrality  during  the  remainder  of  the  present  war  between 
France  and  England. 

I  have  been  much  amused  by  your  extract  from  the 
learned  labors  of  the  Analyser,1  with  his  palpitations  of  heart 
at  the  thoughts  of  the  Russian  mission.  This  same  suspicion, 
which  Mr.  Pickering's  political  ethics  have  turned  from  a 
vice  into  a  virtue,  plays  its  votaries  as  wild  tricks  as  any 
other  heathen  idol  ever  practised.  It  is  not  only  perpetually 
leading  them  to  false  conclusions,  but  it  mocks  them  with  an 
image  of  their  own  profound  sagacity.  They  hug  themselves 
for  their  discoveries,  and  attribute  to  the  superior  keenness  of 

1  In  No.  VI  of  a  series  of  articles  on  the  "Diplomatic  Policy  of  Mr.  Madison  un- 
veiled," printed  in  the  Columbian  Centinel,  December  23,  1809,  the  writer  attacked 
the  appointments  of  both  Short  and  Adams  to  the  Russian  mission,  as  proof  of  the 
insincerity  of  the  cabinet  for  peace,  and  as  unnecessary. 


isioj  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  449 

their  own  eyes  the  privilege  of  seeing  what  nobody  else  can 
perceive,  when  the  real  reason  is,  because  there  is  nothing  to 
be  seen. 

By  the  English  newspapers,  which  from  time  to  time  I  have 
the  opportunity  of  seeing  here,  we  have  intelligence  from 
America  much  later  than  we  can  receive  it  directly.  They 
are  particularly  assiduous  in  disseminating  everything  which 
had  a  tendency  to  injure  and  discredit  us  in  the  opinions  of 
the  European  nations.  The  resolutions  of  the  Massachusetts 
legislature  on  the  subject  of  the  negotiation  of  Jackson  have 
had  their  effect  in  an  eminent  degree.  The  conclusion  drawn 
from  them  on  this  continent  is,  that  the  Americans  are  on  the 
point  of  a  civil  war  between  the  partisans  of  France  and  of 
England.  In  France  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  who  upon 
newspaper  publications  and  pamphlet  satire  upon  himself  is 
irritable  to  an  extreme,  has  been  exasperated  against  Amer- 
ica, more  by  the  ribaldry  upon  himself  with  which  our  presses 
and  legislative  debates  have  teemed,  than  by  any  measures 
of  our  government.  In  England,  where  the  contempt  which 
almost  all  parties  affect  for  us  is  merely  a  disguise  for  envy, 
malevolence,  and  fear,  they  recur  to  those  Massachusetts  and 
New  York  resolutions,  as  proofs  of  our  national  impotence, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  our  government's  partiality  to 
France  and  against  them.  Both  parties  are  encouraged  and 
confirmed  in  the  policy  of  oppressing  a  nation  so  debilitated 
by  internal  dissensions,  and  the  result  is,  that  we  are  made 
the  common  football  of  Europe.  The  English  and  French 
newspapers  have  both  announced  that  the  standard  of  war 
against  the  government  of  the  Union  is  ready  to  be  raised  in 
Massachusetts,  but  I  think  I  know  too  much  of  the  charac- 
ter and  disposition  of  my  countrymen  for  this  to  be  possible. 
It  is  however  certain,  that  as  regards  our  relations  with  the 
rest  of  mankind  the  Massachusetts  legislature  has  taken  the 


450  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

lead  of  a  system  diametrically  opposite  to  that  of  the  na- 
tional government.  I  am  also  well  aware  that  the  radical 
absurdity  of  the  Massachusetts  system  is  yet  a  problem  for 
the  solution  of  time.  That  it  will  eventually  be  demon- 
strated to  the  conviction  of  all  mankind,  every  day's  ex- 
perience more  and  more  strongly  convinces  me.  Austria, 
Prussia,  and  Sweden,  and  even  Russia,  have  learnt  this  lesson 
at  heavier  cost  than  we  have.  My  only  concern  is,  lest  in 
the  instability  of  our  humors,  we  should  before  we  finish 
risk  our  fortunes  upon  the  same  stake  which  they  have  lost. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

No.  17.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  25  June,  1810. 

SIR: 

I  have  the  honor  to  enclose  a  copy  in  the  French  language 
of  a  manifesto  just  published  here,  proposing  a  public  loan 
to  be  received  in  the  paper  money  of  the  country,  and  the 
sale  of  certain  public  domains  for  the  redemption  of  this 
paper.  It  will  serve  at  once  to  show  the  disordered  state  of 
the  finances  of  the  Empire,  and  the  laudable  efforts  of  the 
present  government  to  retrieve  them. 

The  assignation  bank  bills  are  the  only  currency  in  com- 
mon circulation.  They  are  the  representatives  and  sub- 
stitute of  the  copper  coin.  During  the  reign  of  the  Empress 
Catherine  this  bank  was  established,  and  bills  of  IOO,  of  50, 
25,  10  and  5  roubles  were  issued,  upon  their  amount  in  cop- 
per, deposited,  or  supposed  to  be  deposited,  at  the  bank.  As 
the  government  contracted  no  obligation  to  redeem  the  bills 


isio]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  451 

upon  presentation  in  gold  or  silver,  the  bulk  and  weight  of 
the  metal  represented  by  the  paper  operated  as  a  security 
against  the  pressure  of  extraordinary  calls,  and  as  the  ne- 
cessities of  the  government  arose  the  bills  continued  to  multi- 
ply until  all  the  copper  mines  of  the  Empire  would  not  have 
sufficed  for  their  redemption.  The  natural  effect  of  this 
multiplication  was  depreciation  in  the  value  of  the  bills,  and 
when  the  sums  issued  had  amounted  to  one  hundred  millions 
of  roubles,  the  Empress  Catherine  published  a  declaration 
that  she  would  not  exceed  that  emission.  Her  successor, 
however,  not  conceiving  himself  bound  by  that  stipulation 
resumed  the  practice  of  supplying  his  wants  by  the  manu- 
facture of  assignation  paper,  which  has  continued  to  swell 
in  quantity  and  to  shrink  in  value,  until  the  amount  in 
circulation  is  supposed  to  exceed  six  hundred  millions  of 
roubles,  and  until  the  paper  rouble  passes  current  in  all  pay- 
ments for  a  little  more  than  one  third  of  a  rouble  in  silver. 
The  promise,  that  no  more  paper  of  this  bank  should 
henceforth  be  issued,  was  renewed  in  a  prior  manifesto  pub- 
lished in  February  last,  soon  after  the  new  organization  of  the 
Imperial  Council.  At  present,  this  loan  upon  terms  ex- 
tremely favorable  to  the  lenders  and  proportionably  burden- 
some to  the  government  is  proposed  for  the  purpose  of 
withdrawing  from  circulation  some  part  of  that  excess,  which 
has  occasioned  the  depreciated  state  of  the  bills.  The  prop- 
osition to  receive  two  paper  roubles  for  one  in  silver,  to  pay 
the  interest  annually  of  six  per  cent  upon  that  rouble  in  silver, 
and  at  the  expiration  of  seven  years,  to  repay  the  capital 
itself  also  in  silver,  is  equivalent  at  the  present  rate  of  the 
money  to  a  yearly  interest  of  nine  per  cent,  and  an  addition  of 
fifty  per  cent  to  the  capital  at  the  close  of  the  term.  In  the 
sale  of  the  lands  there  are  held  out  further  advantages  to  the 
lenders,  of  no  inconsiderable  importance.  The  loan  is  to  be 


452  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

opened  on  the  I5th  of  July,  but  neither  this  manifesto,  nor 
the  recent  accounts  of  the  splendid  victories  obtained  over 
the  Turks  have  yet  raised  the  value  of  paper  assignations  in 
the  market.  .  .  . 

The  British  fleet  under  the  command  of  Sir  James  Sau- 
marez  1  has  entered  the  Baltic,  and  to  the  number  of  twenty 
ships  of  the  line,  and  a  proportionable  number  of  frigates  and 
smaller  armed  vessels,  is  stationed  at  the  various  passages 
of  entrance  to  that  sea.  The  admiral  himself  is  before 
Gothenburg,  and  has  made  a  declaration,  that  no  vessel  ex- 
cepting such  as  are  provided  with  British  licenses  will  be 
permitted  by  him  to  pass  either  to  or  from  any  port  from 
which  the  British  flag  is  excluded.  From  this  order  he  has 
also  declared  that  American  vessels  are  notexcepted,  and  I 
am  informed  that  he  has  turned  back  an  American  vessel 
coming  from  Kiel  in  Holstein,  bound  to  St.  Petersburg,  and 
endorsed  her  papers  not  to  proceed  to  any  port  from  which 
the  British  flag  is  excluded.  It  was  on  the  24th  of  May  that 
he  made  the  declaration  that  American  vessels  were  included 
in  his  orders,  which  it  appears  were  not  known  among  the 
merchants  of  London  on  the  22nd  of  the  same  month. 

They  are  said  to  have  been  issued  since  the  appointment  of 
Mr.  Yorke  2  as  first  Lord  of  the  Admiralty.  The  late  charge 
des  affaires  of  Sweden  in  London,  Mr.  Brinckmann  3  has  al- 
ready returned  to  his  own  country,  and  Mr.  Foster,  who  was 
in  the  same  capacity  at  Stockholm,  has  been  ordered  to  leave 
that  kingdom,  an  order  with  which  he  declined  to  comply, 
until  it  was  communicated  to  him  in  writing.  There  is  no 
doubt  but  that  the  Swedish  Government  has  submitted  to 
take  this  step  with  great  reluctance;  but  it  was  the  price  of 

1  (1757-1836). 

2  Sir  Joseph  Sydney  Yorke  (1768-1831). 

3  Charles-Gustave  Brinckmann  (1764-1848). 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  453 

their  peace  with  Russia,  and  more  especially  with  France. 
The  consequences  to  the  Swedish  commerce  will  be  serious. 
Admiral  Saumarez  has  already  taken  a  great  number  of 
Swedish  vessels,  and  as  the  rupture  is  avowedly  made  by 
Sweden  herself,  it  is  hardly  to  be  expected  that  any  of  the 
captured  vessels  will  escape  confiscation. 

I  have  received  lately  from  Mr.  George  Joy  two  English 
copies  of  the  new  Danish  privateering  law;  one  of  which  I 
enclose  to  you  with  this  letter.  Under  this  law,  nearly  one 
hundred  vessels  had  before  the  first  of  the  present  month 
been  taken  into  Copenhagen;  about  twenty  of  which  are 
Americans,  some  of  them  directly  from  the  United  States, 
captured  after  entering  at  Elsineur,  and  paying  the  duties  on 
the  passage  of  the  Sound.  I  have  mentioned  these  circum- 
stances to  the  Baron  de  Blome,  the  Danish  minister  at  this 
court,  and  suggested  to  him  the  hardship  of  this  course  of 
proceeding.  He  has  repeatedly  intimated  to  me  a  wish  that 
there  were  some  authorised  officer  of  the  United  States  at 
Copenhagen,  to  make  suitable  representations  to  the  gov- 
ernment itself.  Those  of  a  consul,  he  observed,  could  not 
carry  with  them  the  weight  which  would  have  much  influence; 
but  it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether  any  representations 
would  overpower  the  prevalence  of  the  privateering  influence, 
stimulated  by  that  of  France.  The  resignation  of  Count 
BernstorfT,  the  principal  cabinet  minister,  and  head  of  the 
Department  of  Foreign  Affairs,  is  viewed  as  indicating  the 
prospect  of  increasing  rigor  rather  than  of  relaxation  on 
the  part  of  that  government.  The  Baron  de  Rosenkranz 
who  is  appointed  in  his  stead  is  at  Paris  on  a  special  mission, 
and  Count  Bernstorff  retains  the  management  of  the  foreign 
department,  until  his  return.  .  .  . 


454  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  30  June,  1810. 
»•••••• 

We  are  expecting  to  hear  from  day  to  day  of  a  great  battle 
in  Spain,  and  the  continuance  of  the  war  or  the  restoration 
of  peace  is  supposed  to  depend  upon  its  event.  Spain  and 
Portugal  are  the  only  remaining  parts  of  the  European  con- 
tinent which  furnish  a  pretext  for  continuing  the  war  on  the 
part  of  England,  but  there  is  so  much  internal  fermentation 
in  that  country  just  now,  that  her  government  may  very 
possibly  find  it  necessary  to  maintain  at  all  hazards  a  foreign 
war,  to  procure  peace  within  her  own  islands.  With  regard 
to  commerce,  the  two  parties  have  already  come  to  an  ar- 
rangement de  facto,  which  suits  the  purpose  of  both.  All 
neutrality  and  neutral  trade  are  by  common  consent  of  the 
belligerents  annihilated.  The  British  at  settled  prices  grant 
licenses  to  any  flag,  French  as  well  as  any  other,  which  are 
respected  by  her  navy.  The  Emperor  Napoleon  gives  li- 
censes to  any  flag,  English  as  well  as  any  other,  which  are 
respected  by  all  his  subordinate  authorities.  All  other  com- 
merce is  proscribed,  and  under  these  double  licenses  the 
commerce  between  the  British  islands  and  the  continent  of 
Europe  is  now  carried  on,  to  an  extent  beyond  that  of  the 
most  active  and  prosperous  times  of  peace.  France  and 
England  both  raise  a  large  revenue  from  their  licenses,  which 
ultimates  as  a  tax  upon  the  consumption  of  the  articles  cir- 
culating by  this  new  method  of  trade.  The  people  of  Europe 
pay  this  tax  with  a  good  grace,  and  according  to  all  appear- 
ances our  countrymen  are  prepared  to  pay  it  in  like  manner. 

I  know  not  any  news  that  it  would  be  possible  for  me  to 
give  you  from  this  place,  unless  it  should  be  on  the  war  be- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  455 

tween  Russia  and  the  Turks.  This  is  an  object  extremely 
interesting  here.  But  I  do  not  suppose  you  would  take  much 
concern  in  a  detail  of  the  progress  of  the  Russian  arms.  I 
was  summoned  last  week  to  a  Te  Deum  at  the  Imperial 
Chapel  on  account  of  the  glorious  victories  of  General 
Kamensky  and  the  defeat  of  the  Seraskier  Peglivan.  The 
said  Seraskier,  it  seems,  was  taken,  together  with  the  fortress 
of  Bazardgik  and  about  1,600  men,  a  remnant  of  10,000,  by 
storm;  the  8,000  and  odd  hundred  other  Turks  of  the  garrison 
were  cut  to  pieces  in  the  process  of  the  capture.  Te  Deum 
laudamus  —  for  the  loss  of  Russians  in  this  achievement  did 
not  exceed  in  killed  and  wounded  700  men.  Silistria  sur- 
rendered without  waiting  to  be  stormed.  If  you  never  heard 
the  names  of  these  places  before,  look  for  them  upon  a  map. 
Eight  thousand  and  some  hundred  of  valiant  Turks  were 
butchered  in  the  first  of  them,  for  which  but  eight  days  since 
I  heard  Christian  priests  and  prince  give  solemn  thanks  to 
God.  Ever  affectionately  yours. 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  25  July,  1810. 
•  •«•••« 

From  the  returns  of  the  votes  at  the  April  election  which 
we  have  seen,  I  consider  it  as  beyond  question  that  Mr. 
Gerry  and  Mr.  Gray  were  chosen  Governor  and  Lieutenant 
Governor  of  the  State.  But  on  the  comparison  of  the  votes 
from  the  several  towns  the  prospect  was,  that  a  majority  of 
both  branches  of  the  legislature  still  adheres  to  the  politics 
of  the  two  last  years,  in  which  case  the  Council  must  be  of 
the  same  complexion,  and  the  State  authorities  will  not 
harmonize  very  cordially  together.  The  changes,  however, 


456  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

not  only  in  Massachusetts,  but  in  New  Hampshire,  Vermont, 
and  Rhode  Island,  have  been  so  unpropitious  to  the  Anglo- 
federalists,  that  the  prospect  of  a  separate  empire  will  not 
make  much  progress  during  the  present  year,  and  I  cherish 
the  hope  that  they  will  be  so  steadily  discountenanced  by 
the  suffrages  of  the  people  in  New  England,  that  the  father 
of  them  all  will  renounce  them  in  despair,  and  turn  the  policy 
of  the  eastern  sages,  if  not  to  something  useful  and  honorable, 
at  least  to  something  less  pestilential  to  their  country  and 
their  posterity.  To  anything  more  pernicious,  in  my  sincere 
opinion,  the  Prince  of  Darkness  could  not  spur  the  most 
devoted  of  his  instruments  upon  earth. 

The  panic  terrors  of  a  war  between  the  United  States  and 
England,  which  the  majority  of  the  legislature  of  Massachu- 
setts last  winter  alleged  in  justification  of  their  patriotic  reso- 
lutions in  favor  of  Mr.  Jackson,  and  against  the  government 
of  the  United  States,  are  I  hope  before  this  tranquilized.  I 
see,  however,  by  a  circular  from  the  federal  committee  of 
Boston  senators  and  representatives,  that  their  palpitations 
of  heart  were  still  indicative  of  a  great  alarm,  even  after  they 
had  reason  to  apprehend  that  their  governor  would  be  sup- 
planted in  his  office,  and  after  their  own  news  from  England 
had  informed  them,  that  his  Britannic  majesty's  ministers 
would  not  go  to  war  to  avenge  Mr.  Jackson,  highly  as  they 
approved  his  spirited  moderation,  and  deeply  as  they  re- 
sented the  unprovoked  insult  upon  him. 

I  have  too  much  respect  for  the  characters  of  all  those 
gentlemen  who  signed  the  federal  circular,  not  to  believe  that 
their  fears  were  real  and  sincere.  But  knowing  and  esteem- 
ing as  I  do  the  judgment  and  understanding  of  them  all,  I 
can  with  difficulty  conceive  the  obfuscation  of  intellect  which 
could  permit  them,  late  in  April,  1810,  to  be  in  dread  of  a 
war  with  England,  or  an  alliance  with  France.  There  is 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  457 

something  in  the  spirit  of  party  which  stupefies  even  those 
whom  it  cannot  deprave,  and  which  blinds  the  eyes,  when  it 
cannot  succeed  to  vitiate  the  heart. 

The  most  remarkable  political  transactions  of  the  present 
time  are  in  Sweden.  The  late  king  1  of  that  country  labored 
under  the  same  prejudices,  as  of  late  years  have  taken  pos- 
session of  almost  all  the  New  England  federalists.  He  not 
only  hated  Napoleon  as  he  deserves,  but  he  relied  upon  the 
friendship  and  protection  of  England.  He  lost  Pomerania; 
he  lost  Finland,  and  he  last  of  all  lost  his  crown.  The  Swed- 
ish Diet  not  only  discarded  him,  but  his  children,  excluded 
all  his  dependents  with  him  from  the  succession,  and  sent  to 
Norway  for  a  prince  of  Holstein-Augustenburg  2  to  be  the 
successor  to  the  Swedish  throne.  This  prince  accepted  the 
offer,  and  early  in  the  spring  of  the  present  year  he  came  to 
Stockholm,  and  was  at  the  same  time  adopted  by  the  present 
king  3  as  his  son,  and  proclaimed  Crown  Prince  or  heir  ap- 
parent of  Sweden.  On  the  29th  of  May,  while  reviewing  a 
regiment  of  cavalry  near  Helsingborg,  he  was  seized  with  an 
apoplexy,  fell  instantly  senseless  from  his  horse,  and  expired 
within  half  an  hour  after.  During  the  short  time  that  he 
had  been  at  Stockholm,  the  simplicity  of  his  manners  and  the 
affability  of  his  disposition  had  rendered  him  very  popular 
among  the  plebeian  class,  but  had  at  the  same  time  given 
offense  and  disgust  to  many  of  the  nobility.  These  two  or- 
ders of  society  are  upon  very  discordant  terms  with  each 
other  in  that  kingdom,  and  the  odium  of  the  populace  is  the 
most  exasperated  against  the  nobles  of  the  higher  rank.  The 
suspicion  that  the  Crown  Prince  had  been  poisoned  by  a  con- 
spiracy of  certain  persons  of  the  nobility  was  excited  among 

1  Gustavus  IV  (1778-1837),  dethroned  in  1809. 

2  Christian  Augustus. 

8  Charles  XIII  (1748-1818),  duke  of  Sodermanland. 


458  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

the  people  of  Stockholm,  and  became  particularly  concen- 
trated upon  Count  Axel  Fersen,1  the  Grand  Marshal  of  the 
Kingdom,  his  sister  Countess  Piper,  a  Count  Ugglas,  and 
the  Russian  informal  envoy,  General  von  Suchtelen.  On 
the  day  when  the  body  of  the  Prince  was  carried  into  Stock- 
holm, Count  Fersen,  going  at  the  head  of  the  procession 
which  was  to  escort  it,  was  attacked  by  a  mob  in  the  streets, 
sought  refuge  in  a  house,  from  which  he  was  compelled  to 
be  brought  out,  and  murdered  with  circumstances  as  horrible 
as  any  of  those  which  marked  the  worst  period  of  the  French 
Revolution.  The  other  suspected  persons  were  preserved 
from  the  fury  of  the  mob  only  because  they  could  not  get 
them  in  their  power,  and  finally  by  the  interposition  of  a 
military  force,  which  was  obliged  to  fire  upon  the  people  and 
killed  a  number  of  them.  There  had  been  a  report  of  three 
physicians,  who  opened  and  examined  the  Prince's  body, 
declaring  in  the  most  formal  manner,  that  no  symptom  of 
any  other  than  natural  causes  of  his  death  appeared,  nor 
is  it  yet  explained,  why  the  suspicions  of  the  people  of  Stock- 
holm were  settled  upon  five  or  six  persons,  or  how  they  be- 
came so  strong  as  to  burst  out  into  those  furious  excesses. 
Commissioners  are  appointed  to  inquire  and  trace  the  sus- 
picions of  poison  and  their  foundation,  but  here  the  opinion 
generally  entertained  is,  that  they  are  altogether  groundless. 
All  our  intercourse  with  England  is  again  open,  and  will 
be  in  all  probability  very  great  again.  You  will  hear  the 
accounts  of  interesting  events  on  the  continent  so  much 
sooner  through  England  than  we  can  send  them  from  this 
bottom  of  the  bag,  that  I  shall  have  scarcely  any  other  news 
to  tell  you.  There  has  been,  you  know,  for  about  four  years, 
a  personage  called  the  king  of  Holland,  a  brother  of  the 
Emperor  Napoleon,  who  sent  him  to  rule  over  that  country, 

1  Hans  Axel,  count  von  Fersen  (1755-1810). 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  459 

as  he  now  suggests  for  the  benefit  of  France.  King  Louis, 
however,  whether  from  natural  disposition  or  from  the  con- 
tagion of  Dutch  associates,  appears  to  have  imbibed  an 
opinion,  that  a  king  of  Holland  ought  to  have  some  regard 
for  the  interests  of  Holland.  This  has  brought  him  into 
disgrace  with  Napoleon,  who  first  made  him  disgrace  himself 
by  a  treaty,  ceding  to  France  a  quarter  part  or  more  of  the 
Dutch  territories,  and  surrendering  to  French  disposal  all 
the  private  American  property  within  his  reach,  and  then 
sent  a  corps  of  French  troops  to  take  care  of  his  good  city  of 
Amsterdam.  Louis  became  sick  of  playing  this  part  of  a 
phantom  king  any  longer,  and  has  abdicated  his  crown,1  and 
left  it  to  his  infant  son,2  under  the  regency  of  its  mother,  to 
perform  the  pageants  and  be  used  as  the  instruments  of 
Napoleon. 

This  illustrious  character  narrowly  escaped  a  burnishing 
about  three  weeks  since,  at  a  splendid  entertainment  given 
by  Prince  Schwarzenberg,3  the  Austrian  Ambassador  at  his 
court  on  the  occasion  of  his  marriage  with  the  Archduchess 
Maria  Louisa.  In  the  midst  of  the  ball  the  house  took  fire, 
and  a  number  of  the  guests  perished  in  the  flames.  The 
Emperor  himself  was  present,  but  escaped  unhurt.  .  .  . 
With  my  best  remembrance,  etc. 

1  July  i. 

2  Louis  Napoleon,  afterwards  Napoleon  III  (1808-1873).    His  mother  was  Hor- 
tense,  daughter  of  the  Empress  Josephine,  by  her  first  husband  Beauharnais. 

3  Karl  Philipp  Schwarzenberg  (1771-1820). 


460  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  19.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  3  August,  1810. 
SIR: 

When  I  wrote  you  three  days  since  that  no  instance  had 
occurred  of  a  vessel  having  arrived  in  the  Russian  ports,  with 
a  forgery  from  the  London  market  in  the  semblance  of  an 
American  register,  during  the  present  season,  I  was  mistaken. 
One  case  of  that  nature  had  occurred  a  few  days  before,  of 
which  I  was  not  then  informed;  and  our  consul  general,  Mr. 
Harris,  yesterday  informed  me  of  a  note  which  he  had  just 
received  from  Count  RomanzofT,  enclosing  a  second.  The 
first  was  a  vessel  called  the  Alpheus,  Captain  William  H. 
Crosdale,  (who  I  am  sorry  to  say  is  an  American,)  which 
arrived  at  Cronstadt  the  5/17  of  July;  and  the  second  is  the 
Culloden,  Captain  Charles  Woodward,  whose  register  pur- 
ports to  have  been  issued  at  Charleston,  S.  Carolina,  in 
February  last.  This  vessel  entered,  not  at  Cronstadt,  but  at 
some  one  of  the  other  Russian  ports.  I  have  only  seen  this 
last  paper,  which  appears  to  me  to  have  been  struck  from 
the  same  plate  which  furnished  the  registers  of  the  Weltha, 
Ann,  and  the  Malvina.  Mr.  Harris  however  thinks  it  a  dif- 
ferent and  more  improved  plate. 

The  day  before  yesterday  a  courier  arrived  here,  with  an 
account  of  the  death  of  the  Queen  of  Prussia,1  who  had  been 
upon  a  visit  to  her  father  at  Strelitz;  and  died  there,  or  on 
the  way  as  she  was  returning  to  Berlin.  A  rumor  is  cir- 
culated at  the  same  time,  which  I  have  not  yet  had  the  op- 

1  Auguste  Wilhelmine  Amalie  Luise  (1776-1810),  daughter  of  Prince  Charles  of 
Mecklenburg-Strelitz. 


i3io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  461 

portunity  to  authenticate,  that  the  French,  Austrian,  and 
Westphalian  ministers,  have  suddenly  and  at  the  same  period 
left  Berlin;  though  I  have  heard  no  cause  for  their  departure 
assigned.  I  am  afraid  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the  further 
report,  that  an  ordinance  has  issued  from  the  Prussian  gov- 
ernment, interdicting  the  admission  of  all  vessels  under  the 
American  flag,  into  any  of  the  Prussian  ports;  the  reason 
alleged  for  which  is  the  same  as  that  assigned  by  the  Danish 
government  for  excluding  our  vessels  from  the  ports  of  Ton- 
ning  and  Husum  —  the  abuse  of  our  flag  in  facilitating  the 
prohibited  English  trade. 

These  events  excite  an  unusual  degree  of  attention  here,  as 
happening  precisely  at  the  period  of  the  final  reunion  of  all 
Holland  with  the  French  empire.  On  the  9th  of  July  the 
Duke  de  Cadore,  made  a  report  to  the  Emperor  Napoleon, 
laying  before  him  the  act  of  abdication  of  the  king  of  Hol- 
land, and  recommending  the  annexation  of  Holland  to 
France.  He  says  that  the  king's  act  ought  not  to  have  ap- 
peared without  having  been  previously  concerted  with  the 
Emperor;  that  it  could  be  of  no  validity,  without  his  con- 
firmation, arid  that  it  ought  not  to  be  confirmed;  that  the  re- 
union of  Belgium  with  France,  had  annihilated  the  inde- 
pendence of  Holland;  that  it  is  sinking  under  the  load  of  its 
debts;  that  for  the  benefit,  nay  for  the  salvation  of  Holland, 
its  reunion  with  the  French  empire  is  absolutely  necessary; 
that  besides  it  is  necessary  to  make  the  boundaries  of  France 
secure;  to  complete  the  commercial  and  maritime  system  of 
his  Imperial  Majesty,  and  above  all  to  strike  the  severest 
possible  blow  upon  England.  And  that  as  to  the  young 
prince,  so  dear  to  his  Imperial  Majesty,  (the  king  of  Hol- 
land's eldest  son)  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Berg  was  quite 
enough  for  him. 

On  the  same  day,  9th  of  July,  the  Emperor,  issued  from 


462  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

his  palace  at  Rambouillet  a  decree,  by  virtue  of  which  Hol- 
land is  reunited  to  the  French  Empire;  l  Amsterdam  is  de- 
clared the  third  city  of  the  Empire  (Rome  was  lately  de- 
clared the  second);  Holland  is  to  have  six  senators,  six 
deputies  in  the  Council  of  State,  twenty-five  deputies  in  the 
Legislative  Assembly,  and  two  judges  in  the  Court  of  Cassa- 
tion, or  Supreme  Court  of  Appeals.  The  Duke  of  Piacenza 
(Le  Brun)  :5  is  appointed  the  Emperor's  Lieutenant-General 
at  Amsterdam  for  the  administration  of  affairs  until  28  Jan- 
uary, 1811,  when  the  whole  system  of  French  administra- 
tion is  to  commence.  The  public  debt  of  Holland  and  its 
arrears  of  interest  for  the  years  1808  and  1809  are  reduced  to 
one-third,  and  from  the  commencement  of  the  next  year  the 
taxes  are  also  to  be  reduced  to  the  same  rate  with  those  of 
France.  The  colonial  goods  now  in  Holland,  are  to  be  left  to 
the  proprietors  upon  the  payment  of  fifty  per  cent  upon  their 
value.  The  Legislative  Assembly  in  Holland,  is  to  appoint  a 
committee  of  fifteen  members  to  form  a  council  at  Paris,  for 
making  all  the  necessary  arrangements  for  the  definitive 
organization  of  the  country  under  its  new  laws,  and  for 
adapting  it  to  the  local  circumstances  and  general  interests 
of  the  nation. 

The  only  part  of  this  decree  upon  which  I  shall  at  present 
make  any  observation  is  that  which  relates  to  colonial  goods. 
These  are  the  American  property,  which  by  the  treaty  of  last 
February  was  to  be  placed  at  the  disposal  of  France,  accord- 
ing to  the  state  of  her  relations  with  the  United  States.  It 
is  now  ransomed  for  fifty  per  cent  upon  the  value;  and  fur- 
nishes a  new  comment  upon  what  is  still  called  the  conti- 
nental system.  This  ransom,  of  fifty  per  cent  more  or  less,  is 
the  result  of  all  the  restrictions  and  prohibitions  with  which 

1  Annual  Register,  1810,  502. 

2  Charles-Franfois  Lebrun  (1739-1824). 


isioj  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  463 

for  the  last  three  years  France  has  tormented  the  whole 
European  continent.  If  English  commerce  was  the  object 
which  France  really  intended  to  suppress,  an  extortion  of 
fifty  per  cent  would  not  be  laid  upon  American  property. 
If  the  property  released  were  English  and  not  American, 
even  the  fifty  per  cent  would  not  be  restored  to  its  owners. 
The  new  exclusion  of  American  vessels  from  the  Prussian 
ports  is  probably  a  benefit  to  the  English  trade.  There  have 
been  French  inspectors  and  custom  house  officers  in  these 
ports  during  the  whole  of  this  season.  I  have  advices  from 
sources  deserving  credit,  that  by  the  permission  or  conniv- 
ance of  these  French  officers,  English  vessels  and  cargoes 
have  been  freely  admitted,  under  any  of  their  disguises,  upon 
payment  of  fifteen  per  cent  on  the  value.  Vessels  coming 
under  the  American  flag  could,  of  course,  not  be  laid  under 
this  contribution.  The  effect  of  this  distinction  was  that 
the  Americans  came  more  advantageously  to  the  market, 
and  when  the  Emperor  Napoleon  heard  that  English  goods 
were  introduced  into  the  Prussian  ports,  his  agents  report  to 
him  that  they  came  under  the  American  flag.  So  the  Amer- 
ican flag  is  excluded  from  the  Prussian  ports,  and  for  the 
rest  of  the  season,  the  English  ships  will  come  as  Pappen- 
burgers,  Mecklenburgers,  Danes,  Swedes,  Prussians,  or  un- 
der any  flag  bought  on  the  continent,  or  prepared  in  London, 
pay  their  hush  money,  which  will  perhaps  now  be  raised 
higher  than  fifteen  per  cent,  and  have  the  market  to  them- 
selves. The  Emperor  of  France  will  learn  no  doubt  that 
notwithstanding  the  exclusion  of  American  vessels,  English 
goods  continue  to  obtain  access  in  the  Prussian  ports.  Then, 
perhaps,  exclusion  may  be  followed  by  sequester,  and  when 
that  also  is  found  to  fail,  the  king  of  Prussia  may  be  further 
called  to  account,  and  after  all,  the  American  property  left 
to  its  owners  upon  payment  of  fifty  per  cent.  On  the  other 


464  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

hand  the  English  government  taxes  the  same  vessels  and 
cargoes,  though  not  yet  quite  so  heavily  for  licenses;  and 
such  is  the  demand  for  colonial  articles,  as  they  are  called, 
and  English  manufactures  on  the  European  continent,  that 
this  enormous  double  taxation,  though  it  has  raised  the 
prices  of  all  the  articles,  has  had  but  little  effect  in  diminish- 
ing the  consumption  of  them,  and  upon  the  commerce  of 
England  has  not  operated  any  injury  at  all. 

The  sentence  of  confiscation  has  at  length  been  sanctioned 
by  the  Emperor  Alexander,  upon  the  cargoes  of  the  vessels 
which  had  entered  as  coming  from  the  island  of  Teneriffe. 
The  vessels,  however,  are  to  be  liberated,  and  those  which 
came  in  ballast  are  already  discharged.  There  is  an  opinion, 
of  the  accuracy  of  which  I  am  not  certain,  that  a  great  pro- 
portion of  these  cargoes  has  disappeared,  and  that  the  whole 
transaction  will  ultimately  prove  only  another  tax  upon 
the  owners  of  the  goods.  Now  in  this  state  of  things  the 
American  trade  here  still  enjoys  the  advantage  which  it  has 
just  lost  in  the  Prussian  ports.  Not  laying  under  so  heavy 
contributions,  it  comes  under  more  favorable  circumstances 
to  the  competition  of  the  market.  But  the  inevitable  con- 
sequence will  be,  that  the  English  goods  introduced  here  will 
be  represented  as  having  been  brought  under  the  American 
flag  -  -  a  pretence  which  not  only  the  French  agents,  but  the 
real  traffickers  of  the  English  commerce,  will  countenance,  to 
get  our  countrymen  excluded  from  the  market.  France  has 
not  yet  ventured  to  speak  to  Russia  in  the  style  which  she 
uses  towards  weaker  powers;  nor  to  prescribe  to  her  any 
course  of  measures.  She  has  no  custom  house  officers  in 
Russian  ports,  and  neither  her  Ambassador  nor  her  consuls 
have  directly  demanded  any  act  of  exclusion  to  Americans. 
But  if  the  Americans  are  to  answer  for  the  introduction  of 
British  merchandize  contrary  to  the  prohibitions,  such  a 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  465 

demand  will  not  be  delayed  much  longer.  Of  the  indirect 
efforts  to  obtain  exclusions  of  our  trade  which  have  been 
made,  I  have  correct  and  precise  information,  which  I  shall 
communicate  in  a  future  letter,  observing  that  as  I  have  ob- 
tained it  from  very  confidential  sources,  and  as  much  of  it 
is  secret  history,  it  is  important  that  it  should  remain  such. 
I  am,  with  the  highest  respect,  etc. 


TO  WILLIAM  GRAY 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  3  August,  1810. 

DEAR  SIR: 

I  received  a  few  days  since  your  favor  of  21  April,  enclosing 
the  credit  upon  your  correspondents  here,  at  Hamburg, 
Copenhagen  and  London,  for  which  I  give  you  thanks.  On 
my  first  arrival  here  I  had  apprehended,  that  I  should  be 
under  the  absolute  necessity  of  incurring  immediate  ex- 
penses, for  which  no  provision  is  made  by  the  government  of 
the  United  States,  and  for  which  I  could  draw  only  upon  the 
resources  of  my  own  property.  As  in  this  country,  more 
than  in  any  other  of  Europe,  a  man's  estimation  in  the  public 
opinion  is  solely  proportioned  to  the  style  of  expense  in 
which  he  lives,  and  as  it  is  considered  as  a  sort  of  law  of  na- 
tions here,  that  a  public  minister  must  live  in  splendor  and 
magnificence,  I  saw  myself  placed  between  the  alternative 
of  squandering  in  a  residence  here  of  two  or  three  years  the 
means  of  subsistence  to  my  family  and  of  education  to  my 
children,  or  of  incurring  a  reputation  for  parsimony,  not  to 
call  it  by  a  harsher  name,  which  would  expose  me  personally 
to  great  obloquy,  and,  what  was  infinitely  more  important 
in  my  view,  which  might  have  an  injurious  effect  upon  the 
character  and  interests  of  my  country.  I  had,  however, 


466  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

settled  for  myself  early  in  life  a  principle  which  I  had  every 
reason  to  consider  as  a  just  one,  from  which  I  had  never  de- 
parted since  it  had  been  possible  for  me  to  put  it  in  practice, 
and  to  which  I  had  already  made  too  many  sacrifices  of 
vanity  and  ostentation  to  give  it  up  now  without  reluctance. 
It  was  to  keep  my  domestic  expenses  within  the  bounds  of  my 
income.1  I  soon  found  that  I  had  no  other  choice  left,  but 
to  renounce  this  principle  forever,  and  beggar  my  family  by 
a  few  months  of  extravagance,  or  to  brave  the  opinions  of 
the  world  around  me,  and  make  not  their  esteem  but  my 
own  resources  the  measure  of  my  expense.  I  had  no  hesita- 
tion in  making  my  choice,  to  which  as  yet  I  have  adhered.  I 
have  begun  by  putting  myself  upon  an  establishment  far 
below  that  of  all  the  other  foreign  ministers  here;  a  measure 
for  which  I  have  no  other  justification,  than  that  their  salaries 
are  at  least  the  double  of  mine,  and  that  on  the  establishment 
upon  which  I  have  placed  myself,  if  I  should  stay  here  two 
years  or  return  home  within  that  period,  I  shall  have  ex- 
pended every  cent  of  my  allowance  from  the  United  States, 
and  about  all,  if  not  the  whole,  of  my  income  besides.  Of 
the  effect  of  this  resolution  upon  my  own  reputation  I  can- 
not be  ignorant,  but  I  am  happy  to  possess,  in  the  very 
strongly  marked  attentions  of  the  Emperor  to  myself  and 
my  family,  as  well  as  in  the  proceedings  and  explicit  assur- 
ances of  his  ministers,  an  unequivocal  proof  that  it  has  not 
in  any  manner  impaired  the  interest  or  credit  of  our  country 
at  this  court. 

•  •••••• 

1  Adams,  Memoirs,  June  25,  1810. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  467 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

No.  21.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  16  August,  1810. 
SIR: 

The  following  is  a  translation  of  the  Prussian  ordinance, 
for  breaking  off  all  commercial  intercourse  with  the  United 
States  of  America. 

His  Royal  Majesty  of  Prussia,  our  most  gracious  Lord,  finds 
himself  induced,  for  the  more  effectual  preservation  of  the  con- 
tinental system  heretofore  adopted  in  concert  with  the  Imperial 
Court  of  France,  and  hitherto  rigorously  observed  in  all  the  com- 
mercial transactions  of  his  subjects;  and  for  the  more  perfect 
security  in  guarding  against  all  and  every  abuse,  which  may  have 
been  practiced  in  the  execution  of  the  former  ordinances,  hereby 
to  close  all  his  ports,  against  American  vessels  altogether,  and 
without  exception.  In  consequence  whereof,  from  the  day  of  the 
present  publication  of  this  ordinance,  no  vessel  coming  from  an 
American  port,  or  belonging  to  an  American  citizen  or  subject, 
shall  be  admitted  and  received  into  the  ports  of  this  country;  but 
every  vessel  of  that  nation  is  immediately  and  without  delay  on 
appearance  before  a  Prussian  harbor  or  road  to  be  turned  away. 
The  present  ordinance  is  hereby  publicly  made  known,  to  be  re- 
spected, and  put  into  the  most  rigorous  execution;  and  every 
person  contravening  the  same,  besides  the  confiscation  of  the 
vessel  and  cargo,  shall  be  subject  to  special  prosecution  and  punish- 
ment. —  Berlin,  19  July,  1810. 

By  his  Royal  Majesty's  most  gracious  special  order.  (Signed.) 
HARDENBERG  GOLTZ  DOHNA  KIRCHEISER. 

It  is  not  improbable  that  in  the  ports  of  Prussia,  where 
there  is  I  believe  no  American  public  consul  or  commercial 
agent,  to  detect  the  forgeries  of  American  papers,  from  the 
London  market,  there  have  been  numerous  instances  of  cases 


468  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

similar  to  those  which  have  been  detected  here  and  else- 
where. The  necessities  of  commerce  upon  the  continent  are 
so  much  stronger  than  the  power  of  France,  that  every 
measure  of  force  adopted  to  obstruct  it  is  immediately  met 
by  a  measure  of  fraud  to  counterbalance  its  effects.  All  the 
merchants  in  every  port  of  the  continent  in  this  curious  con- 
test are  on  the  English  side  —  those  of  France  more,  and 
more  effectually,  than  all  the  rest.  As  a  proof  of  which  may 
be  noticed  not  only  the  numerous  licenses  signed  by  the 
Emperor  Napoleon  himself  under  which  a  direct  trade  be- 
tween France  and  England  is  carried  on,  but  the  partial 
opening  of  the  French  ports  to  American  vessels,  precisely 
at  the  moment  when  the  king  of  Prussia  has  found  himself 
induced  to  shut  his.  The  rigor  of  the  public  restrictions 
would  leave  scarcely  any  trade  at  all  were  they  susceptible  of 
execution;  but  their  final  result  is  rather  to  raise  the  rates  of 
insurance  and  the  prices  of  the  articles,  than  to  injure  the 
commerce  or  revenues  of  England.  The  merchants  in  Eng- 
land and  upon  the  continent,  united  by  a  common  interest, 
and  stimulated  by  the  high  prices  at  which  the  very  prohibi- 
tions and  ransoms  keep  the  forbidden  articles,  have  as  little 
scruple  as  to  the  means  by  which  they  shall  evade  the  regu- 
lations of  the  governments  as  the  governments  have  in  the 
choice  of  their  restrictive  measures.  But  it  is  obvious  that 
a  trade  subject  to  such  heavy  risques  and  contributions  could 
not  be  continued,  if  vessels  under  the  American  flag  were  ex- 
empted from  them.  In  such  a  case  the  Americans  must 
come  to  the  market  under  such  advantages  that  the  English 
traders  could  stand  no  competition  with  them.  When,  there- 
fore, it  is  discovered  that  the  British  trade  cannot  be  raised 
to  the  level  of  advantage  by  means  of  forgery,  it  becomes  nec- 
essary to  sink  the  American  trade  to  the  level  of  extortions ; 
and  in  this  respect  as  in  the  rest,  the  interest  of  the  conti- 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  469 

nental  merchants,  being  the  same  with  that  of  the  English, 
they  have  no  motive  to  favor  the  Americans,  and  certainly 
do  not  favor  them.  There  is  no  doubt  but  that  great  num- 
bers of  vessels  from  England  with  English  cargoes  have  been 
this  summer  received  in  the  Prussian  ports.  Some  of  them, 
but  probably  not  many,  have  gone  with  forged  papers,  and 
assumed  the  American  flag.  Many  real  Americans  coming 
directly  from  the  United  States  have  also  entered  there.  The 
French  government  learn  that  English  goods  are  introduced 
into  Prussia.  The  custom  house  officers,  who  have  not  re- 
ceived, and  could  not  exact  from  Americans  the  price  of 
connivance;  the  merchants  really  connected  with  the  British 
speculations,  and  all  the  political  secret  partisans  of  England, 
that  is  to  say,  in  the  Prussian  dominions  almost  everybody, 
all  with  one  common  voice  charge  the  whole  to  the  account 
of  the  American  flag,  and  the  king  of  Prussia  has  it  signified 
to  him  that  the  American  flag  must  be  totally  excluded  from 
his  ports. 

In  Stralsund  all  the  property  imported  in  American  vessels 
was  some  time  since  sequestered;  in  Dantzick  it  appears  the 
same  measures  have  been  taken.  The  exclusion  of  Americans 
has  not  yet  been  formally  demanded  here,  but  the  system 
must  soon  bring  forward  such  a  demand.  In  my  interview 
with  Count  RomanzofF,  on  the  8th  inst.  he  assured  me  of  the 
desire  of  this  government  to  give  every  possible  facility  to  the 
direct  commerce,  between  the  United  States  and  this  coun- 
try, but  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  disposition  would  not  resist 
a  positive  demand  of  France,  which  I  expect  every  day.1 

The  Swedish  Assembly  of  the  States  met  at  Orebro,  on  the 
23rd  of  last  month,  but  no  account  of  their  proceedings  has 
yet  arrived  here.  The  king  of  Denmark  2  is  understood  to 

1  Cypher. 

2  Frederick  VI. 


470  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

have  written  a  long  letter  to  the  present  king  of  Sweden, 
stating  to  him  the  urgent  necessity  of  uniting  again  the  two 
kingdoms  under  one  sovereign,  to  secure  the  existence  of 
either,  and  requesting  him  to  propose  him  the  said  king  of 
Denmark  as  his  successor  to  the  crown  of  Sweden.  It  is 
also  known  that  the  king  of  Denmark  has  been  encouraged 
to  take  this  step  by  the  assurance  of  all  the  influence  of 
France  in  his  favor.  The  opinion  is  that  it  was  even  first 
suggested  to  him  by  France,  and  the  belief  is  that  it  will 
eventually  be  successful.  In  what  point  of  view  it  is  contem- 
plated here,  I  have  not  understood.  I  know  that  the  Em- 
peror Alexander,  on  being  informed  of  the  decease  of  the 
late  Crown  Prince,  and  the  subsequent  convocation  of  the 
States  for  settling  again  the  succession  to  the  Crown,  in- 
structed his  minister  in  Sweden  not  to  interfere  in  the  slight- 
est degree,  upon  this  occasion;  but  as  the  Prince  of  Holstein 
Oldenburg,1  who  married  the  Grand  Duchess  Catherine, 
sister  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  has  been  considered  as  one 
of  the  principal  persons  having  pretensions  to  this  new  suc- 
cession, as  that  settlement  is  apparently  more  propitious  to 
the  general  interests  of  Russia  than  any  other,  and  as  the 
revival  of  the  ancient  union  of  the  three  northern  crowns 
has  the  tendency  to  give  Russia  one  neighbor  much  more 
powerful  than  they  can  be  in  the  state  of  separation,  the 
political  speculators  conclude  that  Russia  must  be  displeased 
with  this  arrangement  in  favor  of  the  king  of  Denmark.  .  .  . 
The  French  newspapers  assert  as  from  authority  that  all 
certificates  of  origin,  purporting  to  be  signed  by  French  con- 
suls in  the  United  States  and  produced  in  the  north  of 
Europe,  must  be  false,  for  that  the  French  consuls  in  the 
United  States  have  long  since  ceased  to  deliver  any  such 
certificates.  The  French  government  must  be  singularly 

1  Prince  George. 


isio]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  471 

misinformed,  with  regard  to  the  acts  of  its  own  agents 
hitherto;  but  probably  they  have  forbidden  to  issue  any  more 
such  certificates  in  future.  I  have  the  honor,  etc. 

TO  WILLIAM  GRAY 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  19  August,  1810. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

•  •••*•• 

About  three  weeks  ago  the  Emperor  Alexander  inspected 
his  naval  force,  and  held  a  review  at  Cronstadt.  Two  black 
men  belonging  to  American  vessels  in  that  port  attracted 
his  notice  on  the  parade,  and  he  spoke  to  them.  One  of  them 
afterwards  came  up  to  St.  Petersburg,  and  obtained  the  Em- 
peror's permission  to  enter  his  service  as  a  domestic,  pro- 
vided he  was  under  no  engagements  incompatible  with  it. 
The  Minister  of  the  Police,  by  his  Majesty's  orders,  sent 
me  a  message  to  inquire,  whether  a  release  from  the  man's 
engagements  on  board  the  vessel  could  be  obtained  for  a 
competent  indemnity  to  the  owners  or  master  of  the  vessel, 
and  whether  I  could  procure  the  man's  wife  and  children  to 
be  sent  here  as  the  man  had  solicited,  and  for  the  expenses  of 
whose  passage  his  Majesty  would  give  orders  that  payment 
should  be  made. 

The  vessel  to  which  the  man  had  belonged  was  the  Presi- 
dent Adams,  Captain  Field  of  Providence.  She  had  already 
sailed  from  Cronstadt  without  him,  when  I  received  the  mes- 
sage. The  man  himself  came  to  me,  and  I  have  promised  to 
write  and  request  that  his  wife  and  children  may  be  sent  here. 
As  I  presume  you  will  have  occasion  to  send  some  of  your 
ships  here  the  next  spring,  I  do  not  know  of  any  way  in  which 
the  object  can  better  be  obtained  than  by  requesting  your 
attention  to  it.  The  man's  name,  he  says,  is  Claude  Gabriel. 


472  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

He  is  a  native  of  Martinique,  and  has  been  about  ten  years 
in  America.  He  lived  three  years  with  Mr.  William  Jones, 
Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives  in  Rhode  Island. 
His  wife's  name  is  Prudence.  She  lives  by  herself  at  Provi- 
dence. He  has  one  child,  a  daughter  named  Annette,  about 
three  years  old,  and  he  supposes  another  born  since  he  came 
from  Providence,  last  November.  He  came  in  the  ship  with 
Captain  Field  as  steward.  If  you  can  inform  Captain  Field, 
or  his  owners  at  Providence,  that  the  Emperor  has  given 
orders  to  indemnify  them  for  any  injury  which  the  loss  of 
the  man  from  the  ship  may  have  occasioned,  and  will  have 
the  goodness  to  pay  it,  if  they  have  any  demand  on  that  ac- 
count, and  inform  me  of  the  amount,  his  Majesty's  intentions 
will  be  accomplished.  The  necessary  expenses  for  the  pas- 
sage of  the  woman  and  children  will  also  be  immediately 
paid  on  their  arrival  here.1 

.  .  .  .  .  .  . 

1  "Just  as  I  am  writing  I  receive  a  visit  from  Nelson,  the  black  man-servant 
whom  I  brought  with  me  from  America.  He  left  us  about  four  months  ago,  to 
enter  the  service  of  his  Imperial  majesty,  who  has  about  a  dozen  menial  attendants 
of  that  color,  and  who  when  vacancies  happen  in  the  number  by  death  (there  are, 
as  you  will  readily  suppose,  none  by  resignation)  finds  it  not  altogether  easy  to 
supply  the  places.  I  had  not  been  here  very  long  before  Nelson  found  out  that  it 
would  be  possible  for  him  to  obtain  that  situation,  if  he  could  have  my  consent;  for 
his  majesty's  Grand  Marshal  refused  to  take  him  upon  any  other  terms,  and  oblig- 
ingly assured  me,  that  he  should  be  taken  only  in  case  it  was  perfectly  agreeable 
to  me,  and  not  at  all,  if  I  chose  to  keep  him.  However,  as  it  was  making  him  a 
fortune  for  his  life,  and  as  I  had  neither  the  inclination,  nor  in  my  own  mind  the 
right,  to  keep  him  against  his  own  will,  as  soon  as  I  could  conveniently  provide 
myself  with  a  man  in  his  stead,  I  gave  him  his  discharge,  and  a  recommendation  to 
the  Grand  Marshal,  who  immediately  engaged  him  as  an  attendant  at  the  Imperial 
table.  He  comes  now  and  then  to  see  us  in  his  splendid  Moorish  dress,  and  is  highly 
satisfied  with  his  new  service,  of  which  he  finds  nothing  irksome,  but  the  various 
masters  of  genteel  accomplishments  which  have  been  given  him  to  complete  his 
education."  To  Abigail  Adams,  5/17,  December,  1 8 10.  Ms. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  473 

TO  JOSEPH  HALL 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  15/27  August,  1810. 


MY  DEAR  SIR: 


You  are  severe  upon  the  political  foresight  and  compre- 
hensive views  of  our  federal  friends.  I  shall  not  undertake  to 
be  their  champion.  What  I  have  staked  upon  a  principle  in 
opposition  to  them  is,  perhaps,  better  known  to  you  than 
to  any  man  living.  The  trial  between  their  political  prin- 
ciples and  mine,  which  as  you  know  the  outrage  upon  the 
Chesapeake  frigate  first  brought  to  a  direct  issue,  I  consider  as 
still  sub  judice.  If  the  correctness  of  political  views  were 
tested  only  by  the  event,  there  have  been  circumstances  and 
moments  which  looked  most  inauspicious  to  my  cause.  But 
as,  when  they  occurred,  I  was  not  dejected  by  them,  so  now, 
that  the  people  of  New  England  and  New  York  have  shown 
their  deliberate  sense  of  the  matter,  I  hope  I  am  not  in- 
clined to  exult  even  internally  too  much  at  this  issue,  es- 
pecially when  the  pleasure  of  finding  myself  justified  by  the 
event  must  be  mingled  with  the  pain  of  seeing,  that  it  must 
be  at  the  expense  of  mortification  and  disappointment  to 
so  many  of  my  personal  friends.  The  moral  poet  tells  us 
that  self-love  and  social  are  the  same.  This  sentiment  may 
at  least  with  equal  justice  be  applied  to  the  special  interest  of 
parties  in  our  country,  as  to  the  egotism  of  individuals. 
The  fanaticism  (for  that  is  the  mildest  term  by  which  it  can 
be  designated),  with  which  the  New  England  federalists 
have  linked  themselves  and  their  cause  with  Old  England 
and  her  fortunes,  is  and  must  be  as  pernicious  to  them  as  a 
-party,  as  it  would  prove  to  their  country,  could  they  draw 
her  into  their  political  system  founded  on  the  same  prej- 


474  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

udices.  The  philological  speeches,  the  New  York  and  Mas- 
sachusetts resolutions  were,  indeed,  but  parts  of  one  stu- 
pendous whole.  They  were  in  perfect  consistency  with  the 
patriotic  proceedings  of  the  two  preceding  years,  but  they  who 
got  them  up  should  have  seen  that  they  were  no  longer  suited 
to  the  temper  of  the  public  pulse.  I  find  by  the  newspapers, 
which  I  have  received  down  to  the  ijth  of  June,  that  not 
only  the  rank  and  file  federalists,  but  even  grave  legislators 
who  wrote  caucussing  circulars,  can  think  of  no  other  [cause] 
for  the  disasters  of  their  electioneering  ticket,  than  some  silly 
tale  about  the  king  of  England's  having  disapproved  the 
conduct  of  Mr.  Jackson,  which  they  allege  to  have  been  cir- 
culated at  the  critical  moment  from  Washington.  Maryland 
and  Vermont  the  last  autumn,  and  New  Hampshire  which 
had  gone  just  before  them,  might  have  taught  them  that 
there  was  some  other  cause  in  operation  besides  Mr.  Pink- 
ney's  private  letter,  to  take  votes  from  them,  and  give  them  to 
their  adversaries.  But  even  after  their  own  April  election,  it 
seems,  they  saw  not  the  least  reason  for  a  diminution  of  their 
confidence,  that  they  would  still  have  a  majority  in  the 
House  of  Representatives  after  their  own  hearts.  Their 
game  is,  however,  not  yet  lost,  for  they  have  still  a  tie  in  the 
Senate  of  the  State.  I  presume  that  even  now,  even  when 
you  may  probably  receive  this  letter,  it  will  be  impossible 
to  foresee,  what  the  result  of  the  next  annual  election  will 
be.  It  will,  as  it  always  does,  depend  in  a  great  measure  upon 
the  events  of  the  year.  As  the  leading  federalists,  some  of 
whom  at  one  time  last  summer  professed  a  disposition  to 
support  Mr.  Madison's  administration,  have  so  decidedly 
made  their  election  to  be  in  opposition  to  it,  I  cannot  flatter 
myself  with  any  prospect  that  their  views  of  public  affairs 
will  soon,  if  ever,  coincide  with  mine  more  than  for  the  last 
three  years.  I  cannot,  therefore,  wish  them  success.  But 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  475 

so  long  as  they  shall  adhere  to  a  system  in  my  estimation  so 
incompatible  with  the  interests,  and  so  derogatory  to  the 
honor  of  my  country,  as  that  which  they  have  pursued  since 
the  base  and  unatoned  attack  upon  the  Chesapeake,  I  can 
only  pray  that  their  measures  may  be  of  a  stamp  with  the 
Massachusetts  and  New  York  resolutions  of  last  winter,  in 
honor  of  the  firebrand  Jackson.  If  they  will  but  move  a  few 
more  impeachments,  analyze  a  few  more  correspondences, 
unveil  a  little  more  of  Mr.  Madison's  diplomatic  policy, 
preach  a  few  more  thanksgiving,  fast-day  and  election  ser- 
mons, and  compile  a  few  more  volumes  of  posthumous  works, 
I  do  not  despair  of  seeing  the  State  of  Connecticut  and  Dela- 
ware as  much  edified  by  their  labors,  as  already  have  been 
the  rest  of  New  England  and  New  York. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

No.  22.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  19/31  August,  1810. 

SIR: 

By  Mr.  Wplliam]  B.  Adams,  who  arrived  about  ten  days 
since,  at  Archangel,  I  have  had  the  honor  of  receiving  two 
dispatches  from  you  —  the  first  dated  5  May,  with  a  copy  of 
your  answer  to  a  letter  from  Mr.  DaschkofF,  containing  some 
proposals  respecting  the  trade  between  the  United  States, 
and  the  Indians  connected  with  the  Russian  establishments 
on  the  northwestern  coast  of  America.1  Your  letter  to  me 

1  "You  will  herewith  receive  copies  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  DaschkofF  and  of  my 
answer.  They  relate  as  you  will  perceive  to  a  subject  of  a  very  delicate  character. 
The  Russian  government,  it  would  seem,  considers  the  United  States  bound  to 
restrain  their  citizens  from  trading  in  warlike  articles  with  the  Indians  connected 


476  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

on  this  subject  (which  is  a  duplicate)  mentions  a  copy  of 
Mr.  DaschkofFs  letter  to  you,  as  well  as  of  your  answer  to  it, 

with  the  Russian  establishments  on  the  northwestern  coast  of  America.  This  is 
manifestly  an  error.  If  the  Indians  be  under  the  Russian  jurisdiction,  the  United 
States  are  bound  only  to  leave  their  citizens  to  the  penalties  operating  within  the 
territorial  limits.  If  the  Indians  are  to  be  considered  as  independent  tribes  in- 
habiting an  independent  territory,  Russia  cannot  of  right  prohibit  other  nations 
from  trading  with  them,  unless  it  be  in  contraband  of  war  during  a  state  of  war, 
in  which  case  she  may  enforce  the  prohibition  on  the  high  seas.  If  the  Indians 
should  fall  under  the  character  of  rebels  or  insurgents  against  Russian  authority  the 
same  rule  may  be  applicable.  In  this  view  of  the  subject,  the  United  States  being 
under  no  legal  obligation  to  comply  with  the  demand  of  Russia,  they  can  no  other- 
wise be  brought  under  such  obligation  than  by  compact;  and  whatever  disposition 
they  may  feel  to  seek  for  a  foundation  and  of  friendship,  it  would  be  difficult  to 
attain  the  end  in  that  mode,  without  maintaining  a  right  which  this  nation  has  not 
yet  asserted  in  opposition  to  the  Spanish  claim  to  the  western  coast  of  America 
south  of  that  of  Russia,  and  consequently  without  a  contest  unseasonable  and  pre- 
mature, at  least,  with  the  Spaniards.  The  United  States  might  indeed  by  a  gra- 
tuitous regulation  yield  to  the  wishes  of  the  Emperor  on  this  subject,  and  certainly 
it  would  be  very  agreeable  to  them  to  give  proofs  on  every  occasion  of  their  friend- 
ship for  his  Imperial  Majesty.  But  such  a  measure  is  not  within  the  authority  of 
the  executive,  and  could  not  well  be  formally  proposed  to  the  legislature  without 
the  usual  basis  of  mutual  stipulation. 

"These  remarks  may  assist  you  in  placing  the  subject  before  the  Russian  govern- 
ment in  a  light  best  fitted  to  satisfy  them.  It  may  be  added  that  as  Russia  has  the 
means  of  enforcing  its  own  rights  against  those  who  intrude  on  the  coast  possessed 
by  her,  or  who  are  carrying  implements  of  war  to  be  used  in  hostility  against  her, 
it  cannot  be  essential  that  any  foreign  power  should  cooperate  with  her  for  the  pur- 
pose. 

"In  explaining  the  sentiments  of  the  United  States  on  this  occasion,  it  will  be 
advisable  for  you  to  bring  into  view  the  hopes  of  the  United  States  that  it  will  be 
found  consistent  with  the  liberal  policy  of  the  Emperor  to  favor  a  commerce  of 
the  Americans  in  innocent  articles,  both  with  the  Russians  and  Indians  in  that 
quarter,  and  even  their  intercession  in  the  trade  between  the  Russian  establish- 
ments and  China. 

"As  it  does  not  appear  how  far  the  Russians  stretch  their  claim  southwardly 
along  the  coast,  it  is  material  that  some  latitude  should  be  fixed  as  the  limit,  and  it 
is  desirable,  as  the  coast  south  of  it  will  enter  into  the  plan  of  Indian  trade  likely  to 
be  embraced  by  our  citizens,  that  the  limit  should  be  as  little  advanced  south- 
wardly as  may  be.  It  appears  from  what  passed  between  Spain  and  Great  Britain 
in  the  affair  of  Nootka  Sound  in  the  year  1790,  that  the  claim  of  the  former  extended 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  477 

as  being  enclosed;  but  the  packet  contained  only  the  copy  of 
your  answer,  and  not  that  of  Mr.  Daschkoff  s  letter,  which  I 
presume  is  in  the  original  despatch  not  yet  received.  Al- 
though from  the  papers  which  have  thus  come  to  hand  I  can 
collect  generally  the  substance  of  the  proposition,  and  your 
sentiments  relating  to  it,  yet  while  ignorant  of  the  precise 
purport  of  Mr.  Daschkoff  s  propositions,  I  shall  be  able  to 
do  nothing  more  than  intimate  to  the  Chancellor  that  you 
consider  difficulties  as  standing  in  the  way  of  this  negotia- 
tion; and  refer  for  further  explanation  to  the  time  when  I 
shall  have  received  your  despatch  containing  both  the  docu- 
ments to  which  your  letter  refers  me.  .  .  . 

The  Prussian  ordinance  for  the  exclusion  of  American 
vessels  from  the  ports  of  that  kingdom  has  been  followed  by 
similar  regulations  of  the  Duke  of  Mecklenburg-Schwerin, 
and  of  the  king  of  Denmark,  extending  to  all  the  ports  of 
Holstein  the  prohibition  which  had  previously  been  limited 
to  the  ports  of  Husum  and  Tonning.  The  following  is  an 
exact  translation  of  the  Duke  of  Mecklenburg's  ordinance: 

Whereas  it  has  been  made  manifest  by  manifold  experience,  that 
the  North  American  flag  has  been  abused  by  the  English,  to  intro- 
duce prohibited  wares,  and  to  effect  the  secret  evasion  of  the  well 
known  commercial  regulations  of  the  Emperor  of  France;  and 

to  the  6oth  degree  of  latitude."    Secretary  of  State  to  John  Quincy  Adams,  May  5, 
1810.    Ms. 

"In  the  course  of  a  few  days  I  purpose  to  ask  a  conference  with  the  Chancellor, 
Count  Romanzoff,  on  the  subject  referred  to  in  Mr.  Daschkoff's  letter.  The  diffi- 
culty of  fixing  upon  a  boundary  within  which  a  prohibition  of  trade  could  be  stipu- 
lated, I  suppose  will  not  easily  be  removed.  I  know  not  whether  it  had  been  con- 
templated when  the  proposition  was  first  made,  but  the  necessity  of  fixing  upon  a 
line  is  obvious.  Mr.  Harris  has  communicated  to  me  copies  of  his  correspondence 
with  Count  Romanzoff,  and  the  memorials  of  the  Russian  American  Company 
relative  to  the  object.  I  find  by  them  that  the  Russian  claim  was  asserted  to  the 
mouth  of  Columbia  River."  To  the  Secretary  of  State,  September  30,  1810.  Ms. 


478  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

whereas  for  a  long  time  past  no  colonial  productions  have  been 
ship'd  and  exported  from  the  real  American  ports,  therefore  the 
military  officers,  in  our  sea  ports  of  Rostock  and  Wismar,  are 
hereby  expressly  commanded,  from  this  time  forth  not  to  admit 
any  more  North  American  vessels,  with  what  papers,  and  under 
what  pretext  soever  they  may  present  themselves,  but  on  the 
contrary  to  keep  special  and  severe  watch,  that  all  such  be  im- 
mediately turned  away  and  the  military  officers  are  hereby  made 
responsible  for  the  strict  execution  of  this  order. 

FREDERICK  FRANCIS. 
Doberan,  29  July,  1810. 

The  Danish  order,  or  as  they  call  it  there,  chancery- 
patent,  is  not  so  ready  at  the  assignment  of  a  reason.  It  says : 

His  Royal  Majesty  has  found  himself  occasioned,  by  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  time  to  extend  to  all  the  ports  of  the  Duchy  of 
Holstein,  the  exclusion  of  North  American  vessels,  already  com- 
manded at  the  Ports  of  Husum  and  Tonning,  so  that  every  North 
American  vessel,  which  after  publication  of  this  sovereign  ordi- 
nance shall  come  to  any  port  of  the  Duchy  of  Holstein,  shall  with- 
out breaking  bulk  be  turned  away,  in  like  manner,  as  on  the  I5th 
of  June  was  ordained  for  the  ports  of  Husum  and  of  Tonning.  This 
Sovereign  Resolution  is  hereby  made  known  to  all  whom  it  may 
concern,  that  they  may  conform  themselves  thereto  accordingly. 
Royal  Chancery  of  Sleswick-Holstein,  3  August,  1810. 

(Signed)  MORTING. 

EGGERS  JENSEN  HAMMERICH 

JANSSEN  ROTHA  SPIES. 

Notwithstanding  the  apparent  rigor  of  these  orders, 
numbers  of  American  vessels  have  been  suffered  to  approxi- 
mate the  Prussian  ports  at  least,  sufficiently  to  discharge 
their  cargoes,  on  a  proper  explanation  of  circumstances  to 
the  French  consuls.  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  they  have  ob- 
tained the  same  access  in  the  ports  of  Mecklenburg  and 
Holstein.  You  know  the  American  property  which  had  been 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  479 

seized  in  Holland  has  finally  been  ransomed  at  a  duty  of  forty 
per  cent.  I  have  just  now  learnt  that  on  the  yth  of  August 
the  Berlin  and  Milan  decrees  were  revoked,1  and  that  from 
and  after  the  1st  of  November  next,  all  the  colonial  articles 
are  to  be  admitted  into  the  ports  of  France  upon  the  pay- 
ment of  duties  so  enormous  that  one  would  think  they  must 
be  equivalent  to  prohibitions :  American  cotton,  for  instance, 
at  nearly  60  cents  a  pound,  sugar  30  and  40,  coffee  40,  cocoa 
I  dollar,  teas  from  40  to  80  cents,  and  indigo  2  dollars.  As 
the  demand  for  some  of  these  articles  is  such  that  they  must 
eventually  be  purchased  at  any  price,  and  as  contraband 
will  always  triumph  over  such  duties  as  these,  I  cannot 
imagine  it  is  intended  to  keep  them  up  at  this  standard.  But 
after  levying  contributions  of  forty  or  fifty  per  cent  upon  the 
stock  of  the  merchants  on  hand,  to  enable  them  to  pay  this 
tax  without  being  ruined  by  its  operation,  these  duties  may 
now  be  fixed  among  other  reasons  to  raise  the  prices  of  that 
stock  on  hand  to  a  level  adequate  to  the  proportion  of  the 
property  extracted  from  it.  In  short,  sir,  from  the  complexion 
of  all  the  measures  which  I  have  recently  witnessed  emanat- 
ing from  France,  the  continental  system,  whatever  may  have 
been  its  original  design,  appears  terminating  in  a  mere  tax 
levied  upon  commerce  by  France,  equal  or  more  than  equal 
to  that  which  Great  Britain  has  levied  by  the  superiority  of 
her  naval  power.  I  have  not  officially  this  account  of  the 
revocation  of  the  decrees  but  receive  it  both  from  Hamburg 
and  Amsterdam  in  such  a  manner  as  leaves  me  no  reason  to 
doubt  its  authenticity.  It  seems  probable  that  it  has  been 
a  subject  of  negotiation  between  France  and  England.  It  is 
to  be  hoped  it  will  be  immediately  followed  by  the  revocation 
of  the  Orders  in  Council,  and  of  the  blockade  from  the  Elbe 
to  Brest. 

1  This  was  an  error.     See  Henry  Adams,  History,  V.  253. 


480  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

Mr.  George  Joy  informs  me  that  he  has  obtained  from  the 
Danish  government  the  means  of  protecting  in  future  from 
Danish  capture  all  the  American  vessels  which  may  arrive 
at  Gothenburg.  I  have  corresponded  with  this  gentleman 
since  his  residence  at  Copenhagen,  where  he  has  certainly 
manifested  much  zeal  and  made  great  exertions  in  behalf  of 
our  unfortunate  countrymen  taken  into  the  Danish  ports. 
Though  his  success  had  not  hitherto  corresponded  with  his 
good  intentions,  he  has  at  least  been  listened  to  as  much  as 
could  be  expected  under  all  the  circumstances  of  his  situa- 
tion. I  believe  that  the  want  of  a  native  American  accredited 
agent  of  the  government  of  the  United  States  at  Copenhagen 
has  cost  our  country  ten  times  more  than  the  cost  would 
have  been  of  maintaining  one  there,  even  with  the  character 
of  a  public  minister.  The  Danish  minister  here  told  me  some 
time  since,  that  he  was  persuaded  much  of  what  our  com- 
merce there  suffered  might  be  remedied  by  the  representa- 
tions of  a  person  duly  accredited,  and  in  an  official  station 
entitled  to  access  to  the  highest  authorities  of  the  country. 

I  cherish  the  hope  that  Mr.  Joy's  licenses  will  prove  ef- 
ficacious to  protect  our  vessels  in  future.  Several  very 
recent  and  rich  captures  have  however  occurred.  A  convoy 
of  fifty  sail  has  been  taken  and  carried  into  Christiansand, 
among  which  are  at  least  eight  Americans  with  very  valuable 
cargoes,  which  sailed  from  Cronstadt  for  the  United  States 
in  June.  Some  of  them  had  despatches  on  board  from  me  to 
your  Department. 

We  had  last  week  a  Te  Deum  celebrated  at  court,  for  a  new 
victory  over  the  army  of  the  Grand  Vizir  at  Shumla.  An- 
other action  at  Rustchuk  is  said  to  have  been  less  favorable 
to  the  Russian  arms.  The  Prince  of  Ponte  Corvo  (General 
Bernadotte)  has  been  elected  Crown  Prince  of  Sweden.  I 
have  the  honor,  etc. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  481 

TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  2  September,   1810. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

•  •••••• 

You  say  that  you  live  in  no  apprehension  of  a  war,  foreign 
or  domestic,  the  most  pleasing  and  most  happy  state  of 
things  that  can  be  announced.  But  in  that  I  perceive  your 
opinion  differs  widely  from  that  of  the  caucussing-circular- 
letter  legislators,  who  a  month  after  the  date  of  your  letter 
had  such  a  fearful  foresight  of  a  war  with  England  and  a 
French  alliance.  The  federal  party  and  the  British  faction 
are  certainly  not  in  our  country  the  same  thing.  But  for  the 
last  three  years  the  federal  party,  in  New  England  especially, 
have  suffered  themselves  to  be  made  so  egregiously  the  dupes 
and  the  tools  of  the  British  faction,  that  they  are  most  nat- 
urally and  most  justly  falling  with  them.  If  they  would 
recover  themselves  in  the  sight  of  their  country,  they  must 
tread  back  a  great  many  of  their  steps. 

You  have  the  news  from  England,  France,  Spain,  Portugal 
and  Italy,  almost  as  soon  as  we  have  it  here.  I  therefore 
write  you  little  of  it.  You  will  know  that  England  continues 
to  reject  time  after  time  the  overtures  of  peace  made  by 
France,  and  that  Napoleon  treats  her  as  the  Sibyl  did  Tar- 
quin  for  the  price  of  her  books.  Last  winter  he  offered  to 
treat  upon  the  basis  of  the  uti  possidetis.  England  would 
not  hear  of  it;  since  which  he  has  definitely  made  Hanover 
part  of  the  kingdom  of  Westphalia.  At  the  time  of  the  mar- 
riage Count  Metternich,  the  Austrian  Prime  Minister,  went 
to  Paris,  and  sent  new  protestations  to  England,  which  have 
also  terminated  in  nothing,  and  Napoleon  has  annexed  all 
Holland  to  the  French  empire.  He  has  now  made  a  French 


482  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

general  (Bernadotte),  Crown  Prince  of  Sweden.  All  this 
time  England  is  haggling  about  Spain  and  Portugal.  In 
those  countries  there  seems  to  be  a  vis  inertiae  too  powerful 
for  either  of  the  parties.  They  can  neither  be  conquered  by 
the  French,  nor  defended  by  the  English.  Perhaps  after 
all  the  peace  will  be  made  by  a  compromise,  leaving  them  in 
a  state  of  neutrality,  or  of  partition  between  France  and 
England.  Independent  they  certainly  will  not  be. 

One  thing  is  so  clear  that  even  British  ministers  cannot 
much  longer  blind  themselves  to  its  evidence.  The  longer 
they  continue  the  war,  the  more  universally  will  it  extend, 
and  the  more  they  will  establish  the  control  of  France  over 
the  continent  of  Europe.  On  the  other  hand  the  demonstra- 
tion is  equally  plain,  that  the  longer  France  and  her  de- 
pendencies adhere  to  what  they  call  their  continental  sys- 
tem, the  more  easily  will  England  be  able  to  maintain  the 
war,  and  the  more  effectually  to  secure  to  herself  the  monop- 
oly of  commerce  throughout  the  world.  I  have  been  labor- 
ing to  convince  those  whose  interest  it  is  to  be  convinced  of 
this,  ever  since  I  came  here,  while  the  wiseacres  among  you 
have  been  telling  the  public  that  I  came  here  to  link  the 
United  States  with  the  continental  system,  etc.,  etc.,  etc. 
Since  the  substitute  for  our  non-intercourse,  Napoleon  has 
taken  us  at  our  word.  He  repeals  the  Berlin  and  Milan  de- 
crees upon  condition  that  England  revokes  her  orders  in 
council  and  proclamation  blockades,  or  that  according  to  the 
act,  we  renew  the  non-intercourse  with  her  upon  her  re- 
fusal.1 I  suppose  she  will  refuse.  But  if  she  does  our  pa- 

1  "Lastly,  we  learn  that  the  Emperor  Napoleon  has  repealed  the  Decrees  of  Berlin 
and  Milan,  on  condition  that  England  shall  revoke  the  Orders  of  Council,  and  re- 
nounce her  new  principles  of  blockade;  or  that  the  United  States  according  to  the 
act  of  i  May  last  shall  renew  the  non-intercourse,  only  with  England.  The  Duke 
de  Cadore,  in  most  diplomatic  form,  assures  General  Armstrong  that  his  Imperial 


isio]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  483 

triotic  Junto  will  bear  her  out  in  it,  as  they  did  Jackson, 
and  Canning,  and  Rose,  and  Berkeley,  and  all  the  treaty- 
makers  and  faithbreakers  of  "that  Island"  We  are  all  well. 
I  am,  &c. 

TO  SAMUEL  LATHAM  MITCHILL 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  5  September,  1810. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

«>•«*»« 

Many  of  our  countrymen  who  have  arrived  at  that  port 
[Archangel]  during  the  present  season  have  met  with  great 
difficulties  in  obtaining  admission,  owing  to  the  severity  of 
the  regulations  for  the  exclusion  of  English  vessels,  and  of 
vessels  coming  from  English  ports,  both  of  which  are  pro- 
hibitive. The  difficulty  of  distinguishing  between  English 
and  American  vessels  and  mariners,  especially  by  foreigners, 
the  facilities  and  temptations  which  vessels  really  American 
have  for  coming  from  British  ports,  the  forgery  of  ship's 
papers  pretended  American,  of  which  there  is  such  a  flourish- 
ing manufacture  established  in  the  city  of  London,  and  the 
interloping  trade,  which  by  the  agency  of  some  American 
individuals  is  supposed  to  be  carried  on  with  England  in 
spite  of  all  the  prohibitions,  together  with  the  distance  of 
the  port  of  Archangel  from  this  metropolis,  and  the  want  of 

majesty  of  France  'loves  the  Americans.'    His  majesty's  manner  of  showing  love 
is  peculiar  to  himself."     To  Alexander  Hill  Everett,  September  3,  1810.    Ms. 

"If,  as  is  supposed  by  some,  it  [repeal  of  the  decrees]  was  already  concerted  with 
England,  by  a  mutual  understanding  that  the  corresponding  steps  should  im- 
mediately be  taken  upon  her  part,  all  our  important  difficulties  are  at  an  end,  and 
an  early  peace  between  France  and  England  may  be  expected.  If  on  the  contrary 
this  conditional  repeal  has  been  announced  only  because  it  was  known  that  Eng- 
land on  her  part  would  not  comply  with  the  conditions,  it  will  only  give  a  new  at- 
titude to  our  embarrassments,  and  increase  the  danger  of  our-  being  eventually 
drawn  into  the  war."  To  Joseph  Pitcairn,  September  4,  1810.  Ms. 


484  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

an  American  consul  there,  and  the  very  unusual  number  of 
American  vessels  which  have  arrived  at  that  port  this  sum- 
mer, have  all  concurred  to  raise  obstacles  to  the  reception  of 
the  genuine  Americans,  coming  directly  from  the  United 
States.  Besides  this,  great  and  formidable  efforts  have  been 
made,  under  a  multitude  of  pretences  and  in  a  variety  of 
shapes,  to  obtain  the  real  exclusion  of  American  vessels,  or 
at  least  of  the  most  valuable  and  important  parts  of  their 
cargoes.  Hitherto  these  efforts  have  been  altogether  with- 
out success,  and  we  have  had  every  demonstration  in  fact 
as  well  as  every  formal  and  solemn  assurance,  that  the  dis- 
position of  the  government  is  in  a  peculiar  degree  favorable, 
not  only  to  the  support  and  encouragement,  but  to  the 
extension  of  the  commercial  relations  between  this  country 
and  the  United  States. 

I  cannot  but  flatter  myself  that  the  revocation  by  the 
French  Emperor  of  the  Berlin  and  Milan  decrees,  though  con- 
ditional as  it  is,  indicates  a  change  of  system  which  will 
relieve  us  at  least  from  a  part  of  the  oppressions  and  vexa- 
tions under  which  our  commerce  has  so  long  labored,  and 
from  the  dangers  with  which  it  is  still  threatened.  Some  of 
our  countrymen  heretofore  have  most  vehemently,  and  you 
know  how  erroneously,  pretended  that  in  that  series  of  out- 
rages which  we  have  suffered  from  both  the  great  maritime 
belligerent  powers,  the  first  example  was  set  by  France.  I 
am  curious  to  know,  how  they  will  be  affected  by  seeing  the 
first  step  towards  a  return  to  justice  and  a  sense  of  right 
actually  taken  by  France.  If  this  example  is  followed  by 
England,  of  which  we  have  had  from  her  so  many  and  such 
solemn  promises,  we  shall  at  least  once  more  have  reason  to 
expect  some  security  to  our  property,  and  some  respect  for 
our  rights  upon  the  ocean.  But  if  the  war  of  commerce  has 
really  been  given  up,  (as  if  England  revokes  her  Orders  of 


isioj  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  485 

Council  and  new  blockade  principles  it  evidently  has  been,) 
there  will  nothing  be  left  about  which  they  can  long  contend, 
and  we  shall  probably  have  a  peace  before  the  next  spring. 

I  have  not  seen  the  Anthology  review  nor  any  other  of  my 
lectures.1  On  leaving  home  I  requested  my  brother,  when  the 
lectures  should  be  published  to  send  you  a  set  of  them,  of 
which  as  a  token  of  my  esteem  and  friendship  I  ask 
your  acceptance.  I  hope  you  have  before  this  time  re- 
ceived it. 

It  would  have  given  me  pleasure  to  see  the  outline  of  your 
course  of  lectures  upon  natural  history,  and  I  hope  one  day  to 
see  the  course  itself  published. 

The  present  is  not  a  period  very  favorable  to  the  arts  and 
sciences  in  this  country.  The  wars  in  which  the  empire  has 
for  several  years  been  engaged,  and  the  heavy  expenses  which 
they  occasion,  have  introduced  a  depreciated  paper  cur- 
rency, and  have  raised  the  prices  of  books  and  the  materials 
of  books  to  such  a  degree  that  literature  suffers  from  it  more 
severely.  There  is  one  work  however  of  considerable  im- 
portance in  the  course  of  publication,  the  first  volume  of 
which  both  in  the  Russian  and  German  languages  has  ap- 
peared since  my  arrival.  It  is  an  account  of  the  voyage  round 
the  world  in  the  years  1803,  1804,  1805  and  1806,  of  two 
Russian  ships  under  the  command  of  Captain  Krusenstern.1 
He  is  himself  the  author  of  the  narrative.  It  will  be  con- 
tained in  three  quarto  volumes,  with  a  volume  of  maps  and 
plates,  to  the  execution  of  which  the  Emperor  Alexander  has 
appropriated  one  hundred  thousand  roubles.  There  is  a 
French  translation  of  this  work  announced  at  Paris  by  a  Mr. 
Le  Clerc,  who  is  already  known  as  the  author  of  a  general 
history  of  the  Russian  empire.  An  English  translation  will 

1  See  p.  513,  infra. 

2  Adam  Ivan  Krusenstern  (1770-1846).    See  Adams,  Memoirs,  April  3,  1810. 


486  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

also  probably  appear,  but  is  not  yet  in  a  state  of  equal  ad- 
vancement.1 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

No.  23.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

September  5,  1810. 
•  *  •  •  •  •  • 

He  [Romanzoff]  said  2  he  had  also  received  despatches  from 
Mr.  Daschkoff,  stating  that  his  application  [in  relation  to  a 
trade  between  the  United  States  and  a  Russian  settlement 
on  the  northwest  coast  of  America]  had  been  favorably  re- 
ceived by  the  government  of  the  United  States.  That  they 
had  a  growing  settlement  on  the  northwest  coast  of  America, 
and  that  from  it  a  profitable  trade  could  be  carried  on  to 
China;  that  they  had  sent  two  vessels  there  under  the  com- 
mand of  Captain  Krusenstern,  which  had  gone  from  there 
to  Canton.  Canton  was  a  port  open  to  all  the  nations  of 
Europe;  but  the  Russians,  who  are  specially  favored  by  the 
Chinese  government,  had  an  exclusive  trade  with  them, 
carried  on  at  a  place  called  Kiakhta.3  But  the  Chinese  had 
refused  to  admit  Captain  Krusenstern's  ships  at  Canton,  on 
the  pretext  that  as  the  Russian  trade  with  them  had  long 
been  carried  on  with  exclusive  privileges  at  Kiakhta,  they 
supposed  that  if  the  Russians  meant  to  change  the  channel 
of  trade  they  would  have  given  them  notice  of  it.  And  as 
they  had  heard  nothing  about  such  vessels  coming  to  Can- 
ton, they  could  not  tell  whether  they  were  really  Russians  or 

1  An  English  translation,  by  R.  B.  Hoppner,  appeared  in  1813. 

2  This  interview  was  held  on  August  28,  and  is  given  at  great  length  in  the 
Memoirs. 

3  Now  in  Siberia,  south  of  Lake  Baikal.     Its  commerce  suffered  by  the  open- 
ing of  the  Suez  Canal. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  487 

not.  There  had  been,  the  Count  said,  some  sheets  passed 
between  the  two  governments  since  on  the  subject,  but  the 
convulsed  state  of  Europe,  and  objects  of  so  much  greater 
magnitude,  had  so  absorbed  his  attention,  that  they  had  not 
yet  come  to  any  arrangement  with  them  for  the  admission 
of  Russian  vessels  at  Canton.  He  had  therefore  wished  that 
the  trade  from  the  Russian  settlement  on  the  northwest 
coast  of  America  to  China  might  be  carried  on  by  the  Amer- 
icans. And  as  the  settlement  itself  is  in  the  neighborhood 
of  Indians,  who  were  sometimes  troublesome  and  dangerous 
neighbors  to  it,  he  had  thought  an  arrangement  might  be 
concerted  with  the  United  States,  under  which  the  Amer- 
icans might  have  the  trade  of  the  settlement,  under  a  re- 
striction not  to  furnish  warlike  weapons  and  instruments  to 
the  neighboring  Indians.1 

I  told  him  I  collected  from  the  papers  which  I  had  re- 
ceived that  Mr.  Daschkoff  was  not  specifically  instructed 
as  to  the  limits  within  which  it  was  wished  that  the  restric- 
tion should  be  extended,  and  asked  whether  he  could  point 
them  out  to  me.  He  said  that  it  would  require  some  con- 
sideration, but  that  their  maps  included  the  whole  of  Nootka 
Sound,  and  down  to  the  mouth  of  Columbia  River,  as  part 
of  the  Russian  possessions.  It  will  be  unnecessary  for  me  to 
say  anything  further  to  the  Count  upon  this  subject  until  I  shall 
have  received  your  original  despatch,  enclosing  the  copy  of  Mr. 
Daschkoff s  letter  to  you  containing  the  proposal  on  the  part  of 
Russia.  I  do  not  imagine  that  it  is  the  Count's  serious  inten- 
tion to  claim  to  the  mouth  of  the  Columbia  River;  but  perhaps 
the  fixing  upon  a  boundary  may  present  difficulties  to  the  pro- 
posed convention  which  had  not  been  anticipated.  In  the  mean- 
time the  Count  manifested  no  objection  to  the  carrying  on  of  the 

1  A  digression  on  Russia's  diplomatic  intercourse  with  China  is  in  Adams,  Mem- 
oirs, August  28,  1810. 


488  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

trade  between  the  settlements  by  American  vessels.1  And  as 
Russia's  vessels  are  not  admitted  at  Canton,  it  is  much  for 
the  interest  of  the  settlement  that  vessels  which  have  access 
there  should  come  and  take  their  peltries  to  carry  them.  This 
can  be  done  so  conveniently,  and  probably  so  cheaply,  by  no 
others  as  by  the  Americans.2 

I  took  the  opportunity  of  this  same  conference  to  converse 
with  the  Count  upon  the  difficulties  which  our  countrymen 
experience  in  obtaining  admission  into  the  Russian  ports,  of 
which  there  were  some  complaints  made  to  me  from  Cron- 
stadt,  and  many  from  Archangel.  The  imperial  ordinances 
prohibit,  under  pain  of  confiscation  of  the  cargoes,  the  en- 
trance of  vessels  from  English  ports  or  ports  of  other  nations 
with  which  Russia  is  at  war;  and  also  of  articles  of  mer- 
chandise, the  growth  or  produce  of  such  countries.  To  this 
number  is  now  added  by  the  ordinance  of  the  22  May  last 
the  ports  of  Portugal  on  the  continent  of  Europe  which  are 
understood  to  be  in  possession  of  the  English.  A  number  of 
American  vessels,  however,  have  arrived  at  Archangel  from 
Lisbon  and  Oporto,  which  sailed  from  those  ports  before  any 
notice  had  been  given  that  they  could  not  be  admitted  as 
coming  from  thence  into  Russia,  and  with  papers  duly  au- 
thenticated by  the  Russian  consuls.  On  presenting  them- 
selves at  Archangel  they  were  not  admitted  to  an  entry  and 
one  of  them  at  least  had  after  examination  of  the  papers  been 
ordered  to  depart  within  thirty  days.  One  other  being  under 
absolute  necessity  of  undergoing  repairs  before  she  could 
sail,  had  been  allowed  to  discharge  her  cargo,  giving  bonds 
to  take  it  on  board  again  when  the  necessary  repairs  should 
be  completed.  The  captains  of  both  these  vessels  addressed 
themselves  directly  to  me,  requesting  me  to  obtain,  if  pos- 

1  Italics  represent  cypher. 

2  See  Adams,  Memoirs,  October  9,  1810. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  489 

sible,  permission  for  them  to  enter,  and  to  dispose  of  their 
cargoes.  Several  applications  of  a  similar  kind  were  also 
made  to  our  consul,  Mr.  Harris,  to  whose  department  they 
more  properly  belonged  than  to  mine.  I  had,  however,  in  a 
personal  interview  with  Count  RomanzofF  early  in  the  last 
month  urged  to  him  all  the  equitable  considerations  which 
pleaded  for  the  admission  of  these  vessels.  With  regard  to 
the  one  which  had  taken  damage  and  required  repairs  the 
Count  had  given  encouragement  to  expect  that  an  exception 
would  be  made  in  his  favor,  and  on  that  case  he  desired  me 
to  write  him  an  official  note.  As  to  the  rest  he  gave  me  the 
answer  which  I  had  expected,  that  to  a  measure  general  in 
its  nature  and  arising  from  the  state  of  war,  it  was  not  pos- 
sible to  allow  particular  exceptions  on  account  of  the  mere 
want  of  previous  notice.  But  in  writing  the  note  I  renewed 
the  application  generally  as  well  as  that  for  the  particular 
case  of  the  damaged  vessel,  because  I  knew  that  in  this  form 
it  would  all  be  presented  to  the  consideration  of  the  Emperor 
himself,  and  that  if  there  was  any  possibility  of  success,  it  would 
arise  from  his  personal  disposition,  so  congenial  with  every- 
thing equitable  and  humane,  and  so  peculiarly  friendly  to  the 
United  States.  I  have  not  yet  received  an  answer  to  this  note, 
but  I  know  that  on  a  representation  of  the  circumstances  set 
forth  in  it  to  the  Emperor,  he  said  he  thought  the  vessels  ought 
to  be  admitted. 

The  obstacles  to  the  admission  of  our  vessels,  especially 
at  the  port  of  Archangel,  have  not  been  confined  to  those 
coming  from  the  Portuguese  ports.  For  the  purpose  of 
carrying  into  execution  the  prohibitory  ordinances,  several 
persons  in  each  of  the  ports  have  been  appointed  commis- 
sioners for  the  examination  of  the  papers  of  neutral  vessels. 
They  are  styled  the  Commission  of  Neutral  Navigation.1  The 

1  Not  in  cypher. 


490  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [iSio 

papers  of  all  vessels  upon  their  arrival  are  in  the  first  instance 
submitted  to  their  inspection.  Like  all  organized  public 
offices,  they  have  only  certain  hours  of  transacting  business, 
and  in  this  country  are  subject  to  the  interruptions  of  the 
numerous  holidays  of  the  church,  as  well  as  of  Sundays. 
By  their  constitution  consisting  of  several  members,  they 
naturally  become  in  some  respects  a  deliberative  body. 
Having  during  the  season  of  open  navigation  much  business 
upon  their  hands,  they  generally  take  up  the  cases  in  the 
order  in  which  they  are  brought  before  them.  If  in  the  ex- 
amination of  any  papers,  circumstances  occur  which  any  one 
of  the  commissioners  deems  suspicious,  they  give  rise  to  dis- 
cussions, to  delays,  and  almost  always  a  reference  of  the 
papers,  and  of  the  questions  arising  from  them,  to  the  deci- 
sion of  the  Minister  of  Commerce  at  St.  Petersburg.  These 
questions  so  frequently  happen  that  I  am  told  of  nearly  three 
hundred  vessels  arrived  at  Archangel  this  season,  less  than 
one  hundred  had  about  the  beginning  of  last  month  been 
admitted. 

The  period  during  which  navigation  is  practicable  to  and 
from  Archangel  seldom  exceeds  four  months  in  the  year. 
Should  the  vessels  which  have  arrived,  and  are  still  arriving, 
be  delayed  much  longer  before  they  are  admitted,  they  will 
be  compelled  to  winter  there,  which  for  all  of  them  will  be 
very  injurious,  and  for  some  almost  equivalent  to  a  total 
loss  of  the  voyage.  I  had  in  my  former  conference  with 
Count  Romanzoff  spoken  to  him  on  this  subject;  but  in  this 
last,  the  season  being  so  much  farther  advanced,  I  pressed 
it  upon  him  with  as  much  urgency  as  I  found  he  would  bear 
without  taking  offense.  I  observed  to  him  that  the  naviga- 
tion from  Archangel  would  probably  be  closed  within  a 
month  or  six  weeks;  that  the  length  of  the  voyages,  both  in 
coming  and  returning,  of  American  vessels,  made  a  longer 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  491 

time  necessary  for  them  to  remain  in  port  than  for  others,  and 
pleaded  equitably  for  a  peculiar  attention  of  despatch  in 
their  behalf;  that  after  their  admission  they  must  yet  have 
time  to  dispose  of  the  cargoes  they  had  brought,  and  to  pur- 
chase cargoes  for  their  return,  none  of  which  business  could 
be  transacted  while  they  were  left  in  suspense  whether  they 
should  be  finally  admitted  at  all;  that  possibly  Baron  Camp- 
enhausen,  with  whom  I  had  not  the  honor  of  being  personally 
acquainted,  and  with  whom,  if  I  did  know  him,  it  might  per- 
haps be  improper  for  me  to  have  any  conversation  upon  these 
subjects,  might  entertain  suspicions  in  relation  to  many 
American  vessels,  owing  to  the  extraordinary  numbers  of 
them  which  had  arrived  during  the  present  season.  But  the 
fact  was  that  a  number  far  beyond  that  of  any  preceding 
year  had  really  arrived,  both  here  and  at  Archangel,  coming 
directly  from  the  United  States,  and  destined  to  return 
directly  thither;  that  I  had  anticipated  this  event,  and,  as  he 
knew,  had  announced  it  to  him  as  infallible,  so  long  ago  as 
last  winter;  that  the  causes  of  it  were  the  obstructions  to  our 
commerce,  which  it  experienced  in  almost  every  other  quar- 
ter; the  suspension  of  it  by  our  own  laws  in  the  preceding 
years;  and,  above  all,  the  encouragement  which  our  mer- 
chants had  derived  from  the  peculiar  favor  which  his  Im- 
perial Majesty  had  been  pleased  to  manifest  towards  the 
United  States.  From  my  private  advices,  and  from  the 
complexion  of  the  newspapers  which  I  had  received  down  to 
the  middle  of  June,  I  knew  that  the  exclusions  which  we 
were  now  subject  to,  in  Prussia,  Mecklenburg,  and,  as  I  ex- 
pected to  learn  by  to-morrow's  post,  in  all  the  ports  of  Hoi- 
stein,  were  all  expected  in  America;  but  many  of  our  mer- 
chants in  all  the  sea-ports  had  said,  Happen  to  us  what  will 
elsewhere,  at  least  we  are  sure  of  being  well  received  in 
Russia;  that  I  hoped  Baron  Campenhausen  would  be  made 


492  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

sensible  of  these  circumstances,  and  of  the  essential  impor- 
tance to  so  many  of  my  countrymen,  that  they  should  be 
immediately  admitted.  I  added  that  this  would  be  still 
more  urgent  for  all  those  who  might  yet  arrive  before  the 
close  of  the  season;  that  I  had  received  numerous  letters,  and 
from  a  variety  of  persons,  all  meeting  with  the  same  diffi- 
culties, and  every  one  thinking  that  there  were  particular 
circumstances  in  his  case  which  would  entitle  him  to  special 
indulgences  and  exemptions.  I  was  unwilling  to  trouble  him 
with  each  of  these  cases  separately,  as  I  wished  them  all  to 
participate  in  the  same  advantage,  and  was  desirous  of  spar- 
ing him  the  tediousness  of  particular  details;  that  I  had  al- 
ready had  the  honor  of  addressing  to  him  a  note,  respecting 
the  vessels  which  had  arrived  from  Lisbon;  that  the  super- 
cargo of  a  vessel  arrived  at  Archangel,  from  New  York,  had 
written  to  me  to  ask  whether  a  special  order  for  his  admis- 
sion could  not  be  obtained,  on  account  of  his  having  brought 
despatches  for  me,  and  also  to  this  government  from  Mr. 
DaschkofF. 

The  Count  said  this  was  undoubtedly  evidence  that  the 
vessel  came  from  the  United  States;  and  he  had  in  other  in- 
stances alleged  it  as  such  himself.  But  it  could  not  be  evi- 
dence, either  of  the  nature  of  the  cargo,  or  that  the  vessel 
was  not  last  from  some  port  of  Great  Britain;  that  it  would 
not  be  therefore  a  sufficient  foundation  for  a  special  order. 

I  then  observed  that  in  dwelling  so  earnestly  upon  the 
wish  that  I  had  expressed,  I  flattered  myself  I  was  promoting 
the  interests  of  his  Majesty's  empire  as  much  as  those  of  my 
own  country;  that  the  number  of  American  vessels  which  had 
come  here,  and  the  quantity  of  the  Russian  productions 
which  they  would  take  in  return,  were  highly  favorable  to 
the  agriculture  and  the  manufactures  of  this  country;  that 
they  gave  encouragement  to  its  industry,  and  contributed 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  493 

more  than  anything  to  support  the  course  of  its  exchange. 
Such  were  the  obvious  effects  of  the  vessels  which  had  ar- 
rived; but  I  thought  it  unnecessary  to  press  this  argument 
much,  as  I  was  persuaded  his  Excellency  knew  better  than 
I  did  how  strongly  it  was  supported  by  the  fact. 

The  Count  said  he  well  knew  that  it  was  exactly  so;  that  he 
had  been  hitherto  the  Minister  of  Commerce,  but  that  a  new 
arrangement  had  been  made,  by  which  all  business  of  this 
nature  was  transferred  to  Baron  Campenhausen;  that  he 
must  do  him  the  justice  to  say  he  was  an  officer  of  great 
activity,  and  dispatched  business  as  fast  as  he  could.  But 
he  was  extremely  apt  to  entertain  suspicions;  and  possibly 
some  delays  might  arise  from  this  circumstance.  He,  the 
Count,  was  fully  sensible  of  the  weight  and  justice  of  the 
observations  I  had  made  to  him.  He  would  immediately 
make  a  minute  of  it  in  writing  (which  he  did),  and  write  to- 
morrow morning  to  Baron  Campenhausen,  pressing  the  sub- 
ject in  a  special  manner  upon  his  attention. 

I  observed  that  my  countrymen  felt  an  extraordinary 
anxiety  at  these  unusual  detentions,  from  remarking  their 
coincidence  with  the  ordinances  of  Prussia,  Mecklenburg, 
and  Denmark  excluding  us  from  their  ports,  and  from  an 
apprehension  that  the  same  influence  under  which  it  was 
known  that  these  orders  had  been  issued  might  be  exerted 
even  here. 

He  assured  me  in  the  most  solemn  manner  that  I  might 
rely  upon  it  there  was  no  foundation  for  these  apprehensions; 
that  the  Emperor's  sentiments  and  intentions  with  regard 
to  the  United  States  remained  unaltered,  and  disposed  to 
give  it  all  possible  encouragement.  The  Count  as  I  have  al- 
ready informed  you  had  given  me  the  same  assurance  in  my 
last  previous  conference  with  him  in  regard  to  the  Emperor's 
personal  disposition,  or  to  those  of  the  Count  himself.  I  have 


494  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

no  reason  to  question  their  sincerity.  But  the  French  Ambas- 
sador, as  a  minister  of  the  first  order,  has  by  the  diplomatic 
usages  of  the  country  direct  and  frequent  access  to  the  Emperor 
Alexander  in  person.  There  are  subjects  upon  which  he  treats 
immediately  with  him,  and  without  the  intervention  of  the  Count 
himself.  The  effect  of  the  interviews  between  the  Ambassador 
and  the  Emperor  are  perceived  in  the  orders  which  afterwards 
go  through  the  official  departments.  They  are  sometimes  par- 
amount at  the  deliberations  of  the  Imperial  Council.  I  have 
some  reason  to  suppose  that  the  Ambassador  has  suggested  to  the 
Emperor  in  terms  stronger  than  the  reality  would  justify,  the 
abuses  by  which  the  English  have  endeavored  and  are  endeavor- 
ing to  shelter  their  property  under  the  American  flag;  and  from 
a  confidential  source  some  expressions  of  the  Emperor  himself 
have  been  reported  to  me  indicating  both  that  such  suggestions 
as  I  now  allude  to  had  been  made  to  him  and  his  determination 
not  to  yield  to  them.  I  cannot  undertake  to  say  that  what  has 
hitherto  failed  may  not  at  a  future  day  prove  more  successful. 

He  asked  me  whether  a  favorable  change  had  not  taken 
place  in  the  state  of  our  relations  with  France. 

I  said  that  France  had  partially  opened  her  ports  to  the 
United  States. 

He  said  he  believed  there  was  something  still  more  recent, 
and  that  a  sort  of  agreement  had  been  entered  into,  between 
France  and  England,  for  the  allowance  of  commerce  in  cer- 
tain articles,  by  means  of  neutral  vessels. 

I  had  not  heard  of  this;  but  observed  that  in  the  midst  of 
all  these  violent  ill  offices  which  France  was  doing  to  us,  her 
government  was  making  the  most  solemn  asseverations  of 
the  best  possible  dispositions  and  the  most  friendly  senti- 
ments towards  us;  that  I  had  within  this  week  or  fortnight 
received  such  assurances  from  the  French  Ambassador  here, 
while  at  the  same  time  the  Mecklenburg  and  Danish  orders 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  495 

for  excluding  our  vessels  from  all  their  ports  were  coming 
out.  The  French  government  too  had  issued  a  declaration 
that  the  French  consuls  in  the  United  States  no  longer  de- 
livered any  certificates  of  origin,  and  therefore  that  all  papers 
purporting  to  be  of  that  description,  produced  by  the  masters 
of  American  vessels  in  the  Baltic,  must  be  forgeries.  But 
nothing  could  be  more  false  than  this  assertion.  All  the 
vessels  coming  from  the  United  States  brought  certificates  of 
origin  given  by  the  French  consuls,  and  I  had  myself  de- 
livered to  Mr.  Lesseps  1  a  letter  from  the  French  consul  in 
Boston,2  informing  him  that  he  had  given  such  a  certificate 
to  the  master  of  the  vessel  which  sailed  the  latest  of  any 
which  have  yet  arrived.  In  the  order  to  exclude  American 
vessels,  which  they  had  made  the  Duke  of  Mecklenburg  sign, 
that  Prince  had  committed  himself  to  an  assertion  equally 
wide  from  the  truth.  He  affirms  that  for  a  long  time  no 
colonial  articles  have  been  exported  from  the  United  States. 
This  was  sporting  with  the  common  sense  of  mankind  in  a 
manner  almost  unparalleled. 

The  Count  replied  that  it  was  indeed  extraordinary;  and 
with  regard  to  the  certificates  of  origin,  he  had  remarked  that 
the  declaration  asserted  the  French  consuls  had  not  delivered 
any  "depuis  quelque  temps,"  an  expression  so  vague  that 
it  might  be  a  week  or  a  year,  and  could  warrant  no  inference 
to  falsify  any  such  papers  yet  produced.  With  regard  to 
this  system  of  restriction,  the  Count  seemed  to  me  more 
than  ever  convinced  of  its  inefficacy,  and  prepared,  at  least 
in  his  own  mind,  to  give  it  up. 

The  day  after  this  conference  I  received  a  message  from 
Baron  Campenhausen  with  information  that  the  papers  for 
the  admission  of  several  of  the  vessels  which  had  been  de- 

1  Jean-Baptiste-Barthelemy,  baron  de  Lesseps  (1766-1831). 

2  Marc-Antoine-Felix  Giraud. 


496  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

tained,  were  already  expedited;  and  that  special  orders  had 
been  sent  to  the  Commission  for  Neutral  Navigation  at 
Archangel,  to  use  the  utmost  possible  despatch  in  the  exam- 
ination of  the  papers  of  American  vessels  for  the  future. 
While  writing  this  letter  I  receive  a  note  from  him,  informing 
me  that  his  majesty  the  Emperor  has  ordered  that  the  vessels 
from  Lisbon,  concerning  which  I  had  written  to  Count  Ro- 
manzoff  should  be  admitted.  The  decision  involves  a  prin- 
ciple which  will  apply  to  many  other  vessels  in  the  same 
predicament,  and  affords  a  signal  proof  of  the  correctness 
with  which  the  Chancellor  assured  me  that  the  Emperor's 
dispositions  towards  the  United  States  remain  unaltered. 

/  have  received  indirectly  intimation  of  the  Count's  desire  to 
cement  by  a  treaty  of  commerce  the  relations  between  the  two 
countries.  Unless  the  President  has  objections  of  which  I  am 
not  aware,  I  would  earnestly  recommend  that  a  full  power  and 
instructions  for  this  purpose  be  sent  me.  The  moment  is  emi- 
nently favorable,  and  such  an  occasion  once  lost  may  not  in  as 
many  years  again  recur.  .  .  . 


TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  8  September,  1810. 

•  •••••• 

I  have  written  to  my  son  George,1  who  is  coming  now  to 
an  age  which  will  call  for  all  the  care  and  all  the  zeal  of  a 
parent  for  his  education.  As  you  are  now  yourself  the  father 
of  a  boy,  and  I  hope  will  be  of  more,  you  will  more  perfectly 
enter  into  my  feelings  on  this  subject,  and  the  more  readily 
indulge  my  opinions,  although  you  may  perhaps  not  always 
coincide  with  them.  With  regard  to  sedentary  learning,  the 

1  George  Washington  Adams,  born  in  Berlin,  Prussia,  April  13,  1801. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  497 

languages,  all  the  classical  studies,  and  such  personal  ac- 
complishments as  are  usually  taught  among  us,  I  shall  de- 
pend upon  the  school  and  the  college.  I  wish,  indeed,  he 
could  have  an  opportunity  to  take  lessons  of  drawing  and  of 
fencing,  of  both  of  which  I  learnt  a  little  at  his  age,  or  soon 
after,  and  of  which  I  always  regret  that  I  did  not  learn  more. 
The  first  of  these  arts  has  not  only  the  advantage  of  forming 
and  improving  the  taste  in  all  the  fine  arts,  but  there  is  no 
occupation  of  life  to  the  purpose  of  which  it  may  not  be 
made  eminently  useful.  The  second  is  a  very  good  exercise, 
and  besides  its  tendency  to  invigorate  the  constitution, 
contributes  to  quicken  the  operations  of  the  eye,  and  to  give 
firmness  and  pliancy  to  those  of  the  hand.  I  suppose,  how- 
ever, that  for  the  present  I  must  be  content  to  let  my  boys 
wait  for  instructions  of  this  kind,  as  you  have  probably  no 
teachers  of  the  sort  in  your  neighborhood.  One  of  the  things 
which  I  wish  to  have  them  taught,  and  which  no  man  can 
teach  them  better  than  you,  is  the  use  and  management  of 
firearms.  This  must  undoubtedly  be  done  with  great  cau- 
tion, but  it  is  customary  among  us,  particularly  when  chil- 
dren are  under  the  direction  of  ladies,  to  withhold  it  too  much 
and  too  long  from  boys.  The  accidents  which  happen  among 
children  arose  more  frequently  from  their  ignorance,  than 
from  their  misuse  of  weapons  which  they  know  to  be  danger- 
ous. As  you  are  a  sportsman,  I  beg  you  occasionally  from 
this  time  to  take  George  out  with  you  in  your  shooting  ex- 
cursions, teach  him  gradually  the  use  of  the  musket,  its  con- 
struction, and  the  necessity  of  prudence  in  handling  it;  let 
him  also  learn  the  use  of  pistols,  and  exercise  him  at  firing  at 
a  mark. 

In  general  let  him  have  as  much  relaxation  and  sport  as 
becomes  his  age,  but  let  him  be  encouraged  in  nothing  deli- 
cate or  effeminate.  Seize  every  possible  occasion  to  give  him 


498  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

hardihood,  inure  him  to  fatigue;  let  him  if  there  be  an  op- 
portunity begin  to  mount  on  horseback.  If  he  goes  into 
Boston  to  see  a  play,  make  him  walk  for  it  rather  than  ride 
in  a  carriage.  Let  him  learn  to  skate  this  winter,  and  if  he 
has  not  already  begun,  let  him  by  all  means  learn  to  swim 
next  summer.  In  everything  of  this  kind  I  know  there  is 
danger,  but  it  is  a  world  of  danger  in  which  we  live,  and  I 
want  my  boys  to  be  familiarized  as  soon  as  possible  with  its 
face,  that  they  may  be  the  better  warned  and  guarded 
against  it. 

To  his  French,  his  speaking,  and  his  handwriting,  I  must 
rely  upon  you  to  see  that  constant  attention  is  paid.  I  have 
directed  him  to  keep  files  of  the  letters  which  he  receives, 
and  told  him  you  would  have  the  goodness  to  show  him  how 
to  put  up  and  endorse  letters  in  files.  Much,  very  much, 
must  be  taught  to  children  without  seeming  to  teach  them. 
A  father  should  elicit  from  everything  in  nature  instruction 
for  his  child,  and  you  must  in  this  respect  be  a  father  to  mine. 

One  of  the  kindest  correspondents  that  I  have  had  since 
I  left  home  is  Dr.  Mitchill  of  New  York.  He  writes  me  in  his 
last  letter  that  the  Anthology  has  taken  favorable  notice  of 
my  lectures,  but  though  his  letter  is  dated  in  May,  he  appears 
not  to  have  seen  the  lectures  at  that  time  himself.  His  name 
was  upon  the  list  of  persons  to  whom  I  desired  you  to  send 
copies  as  presents  in  my  name,  which  I  hope  you  have  not 
forgotten.  And  to  that  list  I  wish  you  to  add  the  names  of 
our  sister  Smith,  and  of  Mr.  Pope,  the  Senator  from  Ken- 
tucky. 

Among  the  reasons  why  I  am  so  much  disappointed  at 
being  so  long  without  hearing  from  you  is  the  wish  to  know 
something  more  of  the  great  revolution  in  the  political  as- 
pect of  New  England  and  New  York,  a  revolution  which  I 
was  far  from  anticipating  at  my  departure  from  the  United 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  499 

States,  and  still  less  expected  after  the  last  winter's  patriotic 
resolutions.  Absurd  and  pernicious  as  I  knew  the  policy  of 
the  faction  which  ruled  in  the  eastern  section  of  the  union 
to  be,  they  had  for  two  years  been  so  much  countenanced  by 
the  people  that  I  had  no  hopes  of  seeing  them  so  soon  de- 
serted by  their  majorities,  or  that  they  had  so  grossly  mis- 
calculated the  effect  of  their  measures  upon  the  public  senti- 
ments. I  hope,  and  from  their  selection  of  characters  and 
the  complexion  of  Governor  Gerry's  speech  and  the  Houses' 
answer  to  it  I  trust,  that  the  rising  party  will  secure  their 
ascendancy  by  moderation  and  conciliatory  councils. 


TO  JOHN  POPE 

ST.  PETERSBURG,   10  September,  1810. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

I  have  seldom  met  in  the  course  of  my  life  with  an  event 
which  has  given  me  more  pleasure,  than  the  information 
which  we  have  lately  received  of  your  marriage  with  a  sister 
of  my  wife.  To  the  esteem  and  respect  which  I  had  always 
entertained  for  your  character  ever  since  I  had  enjoyed  the 
opportunity  of  becoming  acquainted  with  you,  I  am  happy 
to  find  added  by  this  new  relation  between  us  that  senti- 
ment of  regard  and  attachment  which  naturally  arises  from 
our  mutual  and  like  connection  with  the  same  family;  and 
with  regard  to  the  object  of  your  choice,  having  long  taken 
an  affectionate  interest  in  her  welfare,  I  most  cordially  par- 
ticipated in  the  joy  with  which  her  friends  have  seen  thus 
assured  to  her  the  prospect  of  as  much  happiness  as  our  con- 
dition in  this  world  can  comport,  and  which  we  believe  she 
deserves.  For  you  and  for  her  I  can  form  no  better  and  no 
stronger  wish  than  that  through  the  course  of  a  long  and 


500  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

prosperous  life  you  may  both  derive  from  this  union  as  much 
of  the  felicity,  and  as  little  of  the  sorrows  of  human  existence, 
as  for  upwards  of  thirteen  years  has  fallen  to  my  lot  from 
my  union  with  her  sister.  .  .  . 

It  is  now  more  than  two  years  since  I  resigned  my  seat  in 
the  Senate  of  the  United  States,  the  occasion  of  which  was,  I 
believe,  well  known  to  you.  A  full  third  of  the  members 
has  been  changed  since  that  time,  and  a  letter  from  Mrs. 
Johnson  to  my  wife  intimates  that  you  will  also  probably  be 
soon,  if  you  have  not  already  been,  removed  from  that  body.1 
As  I  presume  the  station  which  you  are  to  assume  instead 
of  your  seat  in  the  Senate  is  more  agreeable  to  you,  I  must 
acquiesce  in  your  determination,  which  on  my  own  account 
however  I  shall  regret.  I  had  flattered  myself  that  during 
my  own  residence  in  Europe  I  could  have  enjoyed  the  bene- 
fit of  a  confidential  correspondence  with  you,  which  your 
situation  in  the  Senate  might  have  rendered  useful  to  the 
public,  as  I  am  persuaded  it  would  be  to  me.  There  are 
things  which  I  could  communicate  to  the  President  and 
Secretary  of  State  in  this  manner,  which  it  would  not  be 
prudent  to  write  them  directly,  even  by  private  letters;  and 
on  the  other  hand,  I  want  information  of  the  proceedings  of 
Congress  as  affairs  are  transacting,  and  more  particularly 
than  can  be  gathered  from  newspapers.  If,  therefore,  you 
remain  in  the  Senate,  I  earnestly  request  your  correspond- 
ence, and  the  more  frequent  and  circumstantial  the  better. 
It  will  also  give  me  great  pleasure  to  hear  from  you  as  often 
as  you  can  make  it  convenient,  if  you  should  vacate  your 
seat,  and  fix  again  your  residence  in  Kentucky. 

If  you  continue  in  Congress,  this  letter  I  presume  will  find 
you  in  session,  and  the  return  of  General  Armstrong,2  who 

1  John  Pope  (1770-1845),  remained  in  the  Senate  until  1813. 

2  He  left  Paris,  September  12. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  501 

may  be  expected  to  land  in  the  United  States  just  at  the 
period  when  Congress  will  assemble,  will  furnish  the  govern- 
ment with  such  information  as  may  be  necessary  to  direct 
the  course  of  policy  to  be  pursued  in  relation  to  our  foreign 
affairs.  Although  from  some  letters  and  papers  that  I  have 
received,  it  would  seem  that  the  measures  of  the  last  session 
did  not  give  general  satisfaction  to  the  friends  of  the  present 
administration  at  home,  I  believe  that  their  general  effect 
has  been  highly  advantageous  in  Europe.  The  result  cer- 
tainly was  to  soften  the  dispositions  both  of  the  French  and 
English  governments.  The  non-intercourse,  without  much 
injuring  either  of  them,  had  greatly  irritated  both,  and  the 
mortification,  which  Jackson's  insolence  and  its  chastise- 
ment had  reflected  upon  his  government  and  nation,  had 
further  contributed  to  exasperate  the  English.  The  repeal 
or  expiration  of  the  non-intercourse  happened  at  a  fortunate 
moment  for  them.  They  were  suffering  a  scarcity  of  grain 
and  flour,  of  which  they  immediately  received  an  abundant 
supply  from  America.  Their  fleet  in  the  Baltic,  which  had 
been  ordered  not  to  suffer  any  vessels  coming  from  ports 
from  which  the  British  flag  was  excluded  to  pass,  imme- 
diately afterwards  and  constantly  since  have  allowed  Amer- 
ican vessels  to  come  and  go  freely  to  and  from  the  Baltic. 
France  has  done  much  more.  She  has  accepted  your  proffer, 
and  repealed  the  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan,  upon  condi- 
tions, however,  with  which  Great  Britain  appears  to  be  in  no 
haste  to  comply.  Our  national  character  instead  of  losing 
has  certainly  risen  in  the  estimation  of  Europe,  as  well  by 
the  spirit  and  decision  with  which  the  door  was  shown  to 
Mr.  Jackson,  as  by  the  keen,  bold  and  unanswerable  letter 
of  General  Armstrong  to  the  Duke  of  Cadore,  of  10  March.1 
I  believe  that  the  project  which  both  France  and  England 

1  American  State  Papers,  Foreign  Relations,  III.  381. 


502  THE  WRITINGS  OFj  [1810 

did  at  one  time  entertain,  of  compelling  us  to  take  a  part  in 
their  war  and  of  suffering  no  neutrality,  is  abandoned  on 
both  sides.  They  will  undoubtedly  continue  to  harass  our 
commerce  with  many  vexations  and  oppressions,  but  in  spite 
of  them  all  I  think  that  upon  the  whole  it  will  flourish,  and 
perhaps  the  insecurity  and  danger  to  which  it  will  still  be 
exposed  will  have  a  favorable  tendency  to  check  the  pro- 
pensity for  our  trading  which  has  heretofore  been  observed 
among  us,  and  employ  a  suitable  proportion  of  our  capital 
in  the  improvement  of  our  agriculture  and  manufactures,  the 
surest  sources  of  our  national  independence.  There  is  now 
every  reason  to  hope  that  we  shall  escape  being  involved  in 
this  war,  and  if  we  do,  the  continuance  of  our  national 
prosperity  is  infallible. 

I  trust,  therefore,  that  our  government  will  adhere  to  that 
steady,  moderate  and  impartial  policy,  which  has  hitherto 
carried  us  through  one  of  the  most  critical  periods  in  the 
history  of  the  world.  As  an  appendage  either  to  Britain  or 
France,  the  only  character  in  which  we  should  appear  if  we 
became  parties  to  the  war  on  either  side,  we  should  assume 
an  appearance  neither  of  dignity  nor  of  power.  All  their 
dependencies  on  both  sides  are  merely  objects  for  the  con- 
tempt, or  at  least  for  the  compassion,  of  one  another  and  of 
the  rest  of  mankind.  Our  situation  is  not  only  duly  esti- 
mated by  ourselves,  you  may  be  assured  that  it  is  the  envy 
of  all  Europe.  The  fatal  friendships  of  England,  and  the 
grinding  oppressions  of  France,  ascend  in  secret  or  in  open 
curses  and  execrations  to  Heaven  from  every  corner  of 
Europe.  And  even  those  who  have  no  independence  left 
of  their  own  look  with  some  consolation  and  applause  upon 
the  peaceful  assertion  of  ours. 


i8ic]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  503 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  24.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  8/20  September,  1810. 
SIR: 

The  capture  by  five  Danish  gun  brigs  of  a  fleet  of  forty- 
eight  vessels,  convoyed  by  one  English  brig  on  the  I9th  of 
July  last,  has  been  mentioned  in  one  of  my  former  letters. 
Of  the  captured  vessels,  seventeen  or  eighteen  were  Ameri- 
cans and  eight  of  them  at  least  had  sailed  about  one  month 
before  from  Cronstadt  for  the  United  States.  You  will 
recollect  that  the  present  Danish  privateering  ordinance  de- 
clares all  neutral  vessels  which  shall  have  taken  advantage 
of  an  English  convoy  in  the  Baltic  or  in  the  North  Sea  to  be 
good  prize.  Against  this  regulation  I  remonstrated  imme- 
diately after  I  received  the  ordinance  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Joy, 
of  which  I  presume  he  made  use  in  his  communications  with 
the  government  at  Copenhagen,  and  of  which  he  informs 
me  he  sent  a  copy  to  you. 

The  British  government  at  the  opening  of  the  Baltic 
navigation  season  declared  the  port  of  Elsineur  in  a  state  of 
blockade.  The  only  conceivable  object  of  this  measure  must 
have  been  to  deprive  the  king  of  Denmark  of  the  customary 
duties  paid  at  the  passage  of  the  Sound.  I  know  not  by 
what  other  law  of  nations  than  that  which  pretends  to  the 
dominion  of  the  seas  or  passage  to  half  Europe  can  be 
stopped,  for  the  purpose  of  cutting  off  a  petty  toll  duty  paid 
to  an  enemy.  The  British  government  have  not  indeed 
avowed  this  as  their  purpose  in  the  declaration  of  blockade, 
and  they  have  suffered  some  of  the  American  vessels  which 
they  compelled  to  pass  through  the  belt  to  stop  at  Nyborg 


504  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

and  pay  the  Sound  duties  there.  But  I  learn  by  a  letter 
from  Mr.  Daniel  Adgate,  supercargo  of  the  ship  Helvetius  of 
Philadelphia,  which  sailed  from  Cronstadt  for  that  port  in 
the  beginning  of  the  month  of  July,  that  on  the  loth  of  that 
month  she  was  stopped  by  the  British  man-of-war  African, 
off  Moen  Island,  and  the  captain  was  peremptorily  forbidden 
to  proceed  through  the  Sound,  or  to  pay  the  Sound  dues  to 
Denmark.  I  presume  that  the  American  vessels  which  had 
preceded  the  Helvetius  on  their  way  out  of  the  Baltic  had 
met  the  same  treatment;  for  I  know  that  most,  if  not  all,  of 
the  eight  from  Cronstadt,  which  have  been  carried  into 
Christiansand  at  the  time  of  their  departure  had  determined 
not  to  go  with  an  English  convoy,  if  they  could  possibly  get 
through  without.  Neither  could  they  have  had  any  motive 
for  stopping  at  Gothenburg,  unless  from  the  necessity  thus 
imposed  upon  them  of  going  under  convoy. 

It  is  not  a  little  remarkable  that  after  using  this  sort  of 
compulsion  to  take  our  vessels  under  their  protection,  they 
should  have  left  them  so  completely  exposed  that  they  may 
be  said  to  have  delivered  them  of  their  own  accord  into  the 
hands  of  the  Danes.  I  have  seen  in  the  public  prints  a  letter 
from  one  of  the  captured  captains  which  complains  that 
after  being  separated  from  the  great  convoy  on  the  i8th  of 
July,  off  the  Robsmont,  which  is  on  the  Jutland  shore,  and 
entrusted  to  the  care  of  one  small  cutter  brig,  they  were 
made  to  take  a  course  so  directly  northward  as  to  bring  them 
into  the  very  jaws  of  danger,  within  six  miles  of  the  coast  of 
Norway,  and  close  upon  Christiansand,  the  very  spot  where 
all  the  principal  Danish  force  of  Norway  lay.  Nor  is  it  less 
deserving  of  notice  that  of  the  forty-eight  captured  vessels, 
not  one  is  English. 

Since  the  intelligence  of  this  event  has  been  received  here, 
I  have  had  several  conversations  with  the  Baron  de  Blome, 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  505 

the  Danish  minister  at  this  court,  on  the  subject.  I  have 
urged  to  him  the  injustice  of  the  regulation  which  makes  a 
vessel  and  cargo  liable  to  confiscation,  though  acknowledged 
to  be  neutral  property,  but  merely  for  having  occasionally 
been  in  company  with  an  English  convoy.  And  I  have 
pressed  yet  more  earnestly  the  extreme  hardship  of  making 
such  a  regulation,  so  new  and  so  questionable  in  its  principle, 
bear  upon  vessels  which  had  come  into  the  Baltic  before  its 
promulgation,  and  to  which  therefore  upon  their  return  it 
operates  as  a  retrospective  law. 

At  the  same  time  as  the  British  blockade  of  Elsineur  had  no 
other  object  than  to  cut  off  a  profitable  branch  of  revenue  to 
Denmark,  I  suggested  to  the  Baron  as  a  subject  for  the  consider- 
ation of  his  government,  whether  some  expedient  might  not  be 
devised  to  secure  the  payment  of  the  customary  duties  in  future 
by  the  American  vessels  which  may  pass  through,  although  they 
should  not  be  allowed  to  go  into  Elsineur  and  might  go  in  com- 
pany with  an  English  convoy.1  This  idea  appeared  to  make 
some  impression  upon  his  mind,  and  he  asked  me  to  write  in 
the  form  of  a  letter  to  him,  the  substance  of  what  I  wished 
to  have  represented  to  his  government,  which  he  promised 
me  to  transmit.  He  professed,  as  he  has  uniformly  done,  a 
disposition  personally  very  friendly  to  me,  and  to  the  United 
States.  Nor  have  I  any  reason  to  doubt  its  sincerity.  Al- 
though his  duty  to  support  as  a  public  officer  the  course  of  policy 
adopted  by  his  government,  and  the  necessity  which  he  cannot 
dissemble  of  cultivating  the  good  will  of  France,  lead  him  to  use 
his  influence  here  in  a  manner  not  altogether  propitious  to  our 
interests  or  that  of  Russia,  he  is  of  all  the  foreign  ministers  at 
this  court  the  most  active  and  the  best  informed,  though  perhaps 
for  that  among  other  reasons,  the  most  disliked.  His  pursuits 
since  my  arrival  here  have  certainly  been  very  far  from  mine,  and 

1  Cypher. 


5o6  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

/  may  say  in  direct  opposition  to  them; 1  but  I  have  no  reason 
to  doubt  the  fairness  of  his  mind,  and  I  have  known  few,  if 
any,  public  ministers  upon  whose  word  a  firmer  reliance 
might  be  had  than  upon  his. 

Mr.  George  Joy's  licenses,  as  I  learn  by  a  letter  from  him 
at  Gothenburg,  dated  I5th  of  August,  have  not  proved  so 
efficacious  for  the  protection  of  our  vessels  as  he  had  ex- 
pected. Indeed,  from  the  explanation  of  their  precise  nature 
which  he  has  given  me  in  this  last  letter,  the  only  effect  they 
could  have  had  would  have  been  to  protect  vessels  after 
passing  at  Elsineur  from  capture  by  privateers  between 
that  place  and  Copenhagen.  While  the  British  blockade  of 
Elsineur  continued  they  could  be  of  little  avail.  It  is  indeed 
true  that  notwithstanding  this  blockade  some  of  our  vessels 
have  been  suffered  to  pass.  For  the  orders  of  Admiral 
Saumarez  to  his  subordinates,  and  perhaps  the  orders  of  the 
Admiralty  to  him,  have  varied  several  times  in  the  course 
of  the  season.  But  the  first  American  vessel  which  took  at 
Gothenburg  one  of  Mr.  Joy's  licenses,  was  stopped  and 
turned  back  by  the  British  before  he  could  reach  Elsineur. 

The  repeal  of  the  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan  is  upon  con- 
ditions which  render  it  apparently  of  little  effect.  As  yet  I 
have  not  heard  of  a  symptom  indicating  the  intention  of 
England  to  give  up  any  of  her  blockading  principles,  nor 
even  her  Orders  in  Council  of  1807,  as  subsequently  modi- 
fied. There  is  even  in  the  French  official  journals  an  attempt 
to  preserve  the  appearance  as  if  nothing  had  taken  place  in 
the  system  of  France.  Possibly  the  change  of  system  has 
not  really  been  great.  But  the  substitution  of  enormous  duties 
for  total  prohibition  will  not  so  well  suit  the  professed  purpose 
of  annihilating  all  commerce  between  Great  Britain  and  the 
continent  of  Europe,  and  the  sale  of  licenses  by  the  Emperor 

1  Cypher. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  507 

Napoleon  for  all  sorts  of  vessels  at  a  tonnage  duty  of  sixty  francs 
by  the  last,  is  neither  disguised  nor  concealed.  While  he  allows 
trade  by  special  licenses  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  he  can  deny  to 
his  neighbors  and  allies  the  benefit  of  granting  licenses  also; 
and  although  there  may  be  a  great  part  of  Europe  to  whom  he  is 
rather  in  the  habit  of  signifying  his  will  than  of  urging  persua- 
sion, there  are  others  who  still  consider  his  example  as  authority 
quite  as  good  as  his  precept.  I  have  long  considered  the  conti- 
nental system  as  little  more  than  extortion  wearing  the  mask  of 
prohibition.  The  system  is  now  at  least  so  far  changed  that  the 
mask  is  laid  aside  and  extortion  shows  her  natural  face.  .  .  .* 


TO  WILLIAM  PLUMER 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  6  October,  1810. 

MY  DEAR  SIR: 

I  received  with  the  greatest  pleasure  a  few  days  since  your 
favor  of  the  i8th  of  May,  which  is  one  of  the  latest  I  have  re- 
ceived from  America.  Although  a  great  number  of  vessels 
have  arrived  in  the  Russian  ports  from  the  United  States 
this  summer,  my  friends  in  America  appear  not  to  have  been 
aware  of  the  frequent  opportunities  which  occurred  of  writ- 
ing by  them.  We  have  been  tolerably  well  supplied  with 
newspapers,  but  excepting  your  obliging  letter,  one  or  two 
from  Dr.  Mitchill  of  New  York,  and  as  many  from  Mr. 
Joseph  Hall  of  Boston,  I  have  scarcely  received  a  line  from 
private  sources  out  of  my  own  family  since  I  left  them.  I  ask 
therefore  with  earnestness  the  continuance  of  your  favors, 
which  will  be  transmitted  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  or  by 
Mr.  Gray,  if  you  will  indorse  them  to  him. 

The  issue  of  the  late  New  England  elections  had  been  in- 

1  Cypher. 


5o8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

dicated  to  us  early  in  the  spring  by  the  example  of  New 
Hampshire  taking  the  lead  of  recovery  from  a  delusion  which 
for  the  two  preceding  years  had  given  me  great  anxiety  and 
apprehension.  The  infatuation  of  that  political  party  in  our 
country,  with  whom  you  and  I  had  heretofore  generally 
been  accustomed  to  act  and  to  think,  their  degeneracy  from 
the  just  and  honorable  principles  which  alone  could  ever 
have  attached  us  to  them,  the  glaring  absurdity  and  hy- 
pocrisy of  their  professed  veneration  for  the  policy  of  Wash- 
ington, while  they  were  aiming  a  fatal  blow  at  the  Union,  the 
great  foundation  of  his  political  system,  and  while  they  were 
openly  using  for  their  purpose  all  the  means  which  he  had 
most  solemnly  deprecated,  their  blind  and  stupid  servility 
to  a  British  minority  which  was  heaping  insult  upon  outrage 
in  this  country,  the  profligacy  with  which  they  were  endeav- 
oring to  make  religion  an  engine  of  faction  by  the  mounte- 
bank trick  of  their  solemn  fasts,  and  by  goading  into  the 
pulpit  every  ignorant  priestly  fanatic  that  they  could  employ 
as  a  tool,  to  pollute  with  the  filth  of  personal  malice  and  de- 
traction the  sacred  desk  of  God,  these  were  appearances  and 
practices  which  I  had  witnessed  for  two  years,  accompanied 
with  so  much  success,  and  against  which  I  had  during  great 
part  of  the  time  seemed  so  ineffectually  to  have  struggled, 
that  the  great  change  of  public  sentiment  manifested  by  the 
elections  of  this  year  throughout  New  England  was  accom- 
plished earlier  than  I  had  expected.  The  violence  of  last 
winter's  Massachusetts  and  New  York  Jacksonite  resolu- 
tions, so  congenial  with  measures  of  the  former  winter  ses- 
sions which  had  been  countenanced  by  intervening  popular 
elections,  had  led  me  to  believe,  that  the  public  nerves  were 
still  in  a  disordered  state  and  still  mistaking  the  cause  of  their 
own  disease.  Though  long  experience  had  taught  me,  what 
you  and  I  have  often  remarked  together,  how  unskilful  the 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  509 

federalists  were  in  their  attempt  to  adapt  their  measures  to 
the  state  of  the  public  pulse,  yet  as  unlucky  contingencies 
had  thrown  into  their  hands  a  majority  which  two  years  of 
madness  had  not  sufficed  for  them  to  lose,  I  did  suppose  that 
they  would  not  have  disgraced  themselves  by  such  base 
prostrations  before  the  insolence  of  a  foreign  emissary, 'and 
such  shameless  inveteracy  against  their  own  government, 
without  being  very  sure  that  the  agitated  feelings  of  the 
people,  at  least  in  New  England,  still  went  along  with  them. 
I  was,  therefore,  most  agreeably  disappointed  in  the  issue  of 
the  elections.  It  has  given  me  the  cheering  hope  of  internal 
tranquillity  in  our  country,  and  of  permanency  to  the  Union, 
which  for  the  two  preceding  years  was  certainly  in  the  most 
imminent  danger. 

You  tell  me,  that  I  am  often  much  reviled  in  certain  news- 
papers, and  that  the  clumsy  animals  who  still  earn  their  sop 
by  howling  at  me  have  not  yet  instinct  enough  to  forbear 
coupling  your  name  with  mine  in  their  yell  of  slander.  As 
you  are  a  historian  I  can  give  you  a  historical  thread  to  con- 
sider and  meditate  upon  at  leisure.  In  the  month  of  July, 
lyS/,1  was  published  in  the  Boston  Centinel,  I  believe  the  first 
piece  of  abuse  of  which  I  ever  had  the  honor  to  be  the  object 
in  a  newspaper,  and  what  think  you  was  the  occasion  of  the 
attack?  It  was  because  on  taking  my  first  degree  at  Harvard 
College  I  had  delivered  at  Commencement  an  oration  which 
happened  to  suit  the  public  taste,  and  had  obtained  marks  of 
approbation  rather  beyond  the  usual  average.  In  the  form 
of  a  critique  upon  the  performance  at  Commencement  a 
shaft  dipped  in  venom  was  hurled  at  me  on  my  first  appear- 
ance before  the  public  view  of  my  country.  The  author  of 
this  critique  was  a  person  who  had  himself  been  a  much  ad- 
mired Commencement  orator,  but  who  thought  it  advisable 

1  See  Vol.  I.  34n.,  supra. 


5io  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

to  balance  the  partialities  of  public  indulgence  in  my  favor 
by  casting  the  heaviest  of  his  weights  into  the  opposite  scale. 
The  public  did  not  sympathize  with  his  criticism,  nor  did  he 
ever  think  proper  to  own  it.  The  editor  of  the  Centinel  was 
allowed  and  took  it  upon  him  to  father  a  production,  the 
features  of  which  too  loudly  disclaimed  the  descent  from 
him,  as  the  Duke  of  Orleans  when  he  took  the  name  of  Philip 
Egalite  only  stigmatized  his  mother  by  pretending  to  be  the 
son  of  a  coachman. 

I  will  not  fatigue  you  with  a  tiresome  detail  of  subsequent 
occurrences  derived  from  this  one.  It  may  suffice  to  say  that 
this  anecdote  will  give  you  the  key  to  all  the  ribaldry  which 
from  that  day  to  this  has  appeared  in  the  Centinel  pointed  at 
me.  The  temper  which  first  dictated  that  effusion  has  some- 
times been  suppressed,  but  never  subdued,  and  I  have  too 
long  known  the  general  character  of  human  nature,  and  the 
particular  hearts  of  the  individuals,  to  expect  that  it  will 
ever  be  appeased.  The  two  years  which  preceded  my  de- 
parture from  America  had  furnished  ample  materials  for  the 
exercise  of  that  temper.  But  they  had  brought  my  own  tem- 
per to  the  trial  of  a  higher  test.  By  adhering  to  my  prin- 
ciples I  had  been  deserted  and  sacrificed  by  my  friends.  I 
knew  that  the  ground  that  I  had  taken  was  not  to  be  shaken 
under  me  by  friend  or  foe.  But  the  example  of  such  men  as 
yourself  and  Mr.  Gray,  gave  a  countenance  and  sanction 
to  my  conduct  which  at  the  most  critical  moment  gave  me 
the  greatest  satisfaction,  and  made  me  take  a  pride  instead 
of  feeling  pain  at  the  overflowings  of  malice  and  envy, 
which  were  so  copiously  streaming  down  upon  me.  Hatred 
has  a  keen  eye,  but  its  feelings  impose  upon  its  vision.  They 
whose  purpose  it  is  to  blacken  me  could  not  more  effectually 
defeat  their  own  object,  than  by  shedding  a  portion  of  the 
same  invective  upon  you. 


isio]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  511 

I  now  please  myself  with  the  hope,  that  you  and  your 
associates  in  our  public  affairs  will  now  preserve  by  modera- 
tion and  wisdom  the  ascendancy  which  you  have  obtained. 
But  if  our  country  has  exhibited  a  new  example  of  the  in- 
stability of  popular  sentiments,  the  giddy  habitation  of  the 
vulgar  heart,  it  has  still  more  forcibly  proved  to  me  the 
difficulty,  as  well  as  the  duty,  of  maintaining  oneself  free 
from  the  shackles  of  dependance  upon  any  party.  And  yet 
as  the  government  of  a  state,  and  still  more  that  of  the  na- 
tion, must  consist  of  a  systematic  combination  of  measures, 
it  is  certainly  necessary  and  even  indispensable,  that  in- 
dividual members  of  a  party  should  on  most  occasions,  per- 
haps on  all,  sacrifice  their  individual  opinions  to  those  of  the 
majority,  whenever  this  acquiescence  does  not  involve  a 
dereliction  of  principle. 

It  was  natural  enough  that  the  ardent  spirits  who  felt 
indignant  at  the  outrages  still  continued  of  Britain  and 
France  upon  our  commerce,  should  be  dissatisfied  at  the 
issue  of  the  last  session  of  Congress.  But  you,  who  consider 
things  coolly,  have  very  justly  judged,  that  the  measures 
adopted  were  far  better  than  others  which,  indicating  more 
resentment,  might  not  have  had  more  real  energy.  The  non- 
intercourse,  ineffectual  as  a  weapon  to  hurt  either  of  the  of- 
fenders, had  operated  only  to  exasperate  both.  Its  repeal 
has,  at  least,  been  taken  by  both  in  good  part,  and  has  been 
followed  by  corresponding  relaxations  on  their  side.  France, 
indeed,  has  availed  herself  of  it  with  the  most  address,  by 
seizing  upon  the  occasion  to  abandon  the  whole  system  of 
anti-neutrality  if  England  will  do  the  same.  England  will 
not  give  up  entirely,  but  will  probably  yield  to  some  further 
modifications,  which  may  leave  an  extensive  and  profitable 
field  open  to  neutral  trade.  We  have  escaped,  providentially 
escaped  the  scourge  of  war  with  either  of  them,  and  you 


5i2  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

may  be  assured  that  in  the  estimation  of  all  Europe  our 
national  character  is  continually  rising  on  the  scale  of  power, 
and  of  moderation  and  wisdom,  without  losing  any  in  that 
of  genuine  spirit. 

The  politics  of  Europe  are  still  extremely  complicated,  and 
the  prospects  of  the  future  are  gloomy.  The  new  relations 
between  France  and  Austria  are  not  yet  fully  unfolded  to  the 
world.  Their  harmony  with  Russia  is  yet  uninterrupted, 
though  circumstances  have  occurred  which  might  occasion 
coolness  between  them.  Russia  is  now  carrying  her  victo- 
rious arms  into  the  heart  of  Turkey,  but  her  exhausted 
finances  are  clamorous  for  peace.  The  object  of  my  mission 
has,  I  believe,  hitherto  been  completely  accomplished.  But 
your  cunning  politicians,  who  knew  so  well  and  told  the 
people  so  positively  what  that  object  was,  like  Mr.  Fingal, 
"  saw  what  was  not  to  be  seen."  If  you  will  compare  the  con- 
duct of  Russia  toward  American  commerce  with  that  of  all 
her  neighbors,  not  even  excepting  Sweden,  you  will  easily 
perceive  the  object  of  my  mission,  and  thus  far  its  success. 
I  am,  etc. 

TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  2/14  October,  1810. 
....... 

Your  elections  for  the  House  of  Representatives  in  Con- 
gress will  now  soon  discover,  whether  the  voice  of  the  people 
in  New  England  continues  to  favor  the  general  policy  pur- 
sued by  the  national  government  or  not.  The  measures  of 
the  last  session  of  Congress  appear  to  have  given  some  dis- 
satisfaction to  the  friends  of  the  administration,  but  their 
effect  in  Europe  has  been  good.  Neither  Mr.  Macon's  bill, 
as  it  went  from  the  House  of  Representatives,  nor  the 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  513 

amended  bill,  as  passed  by  the  Senate,  would  have  produced 
a  result  so  advantageous  in  the  measures  of  France  and 
England,  as  the  law  which  actually  passed  both  houses.  Our 
countrymen  must  remember  that  manifestation  of  spirit  is 
not  always  exertion  of  energy,  and  that  to  withdraw  the  one 
for  the  other  is  a  very  dangerous  error  in  politics. 

General  Armstrong  has  left  Paris  to  embark  for  America, 
and  I  presume  is  by  this  time  far  advanced  on  his  passage 
home.  He  carries  with  him,  it  is  said,  some  new  modifica- 
tions of  the  system  of  French  decrees,  favorable  to  the  com- 
merce of  the  United  States.  His  letter  of  10  March,  to  the 
French  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  is  universally  admired 
here,  and  has  done  great  credit  to  our  country  by  supporting 
its  estimation  and  maintaining  its  dignity  in  the  face  of 
Europe,  as  well  as  of  America.  But  while  France  is  holding 
to  us  now  the  language  of  friendship  and  conciliation,  she 
is  playing  us  all  the  sly  tricks  in  her  power  elsewhere. 

I  was  very  glad  to  receive  the  number  of  the  Anthology 
containing  the  critique  upon  my  lectures.1  I  had  more  than 

1  "Mr.  [Samuel  Cooper]  Thacher  .  .  .  then  read  a  most  delightful  long  review 
of  J.  Q.  Adams's  Lectures,  which  was  received  by  all  with  decided  approbation; 
but  the  first  paragraph  and  the  concluding  sentence  of  the  last  was  objected  to, 
on  account  of  its  mention  of  politicks.  A  discussion  ensued,  on  the  propriety  of 
retaining  these  passages,  when  Mr.  [Joseph  Stevens]  Buckminster  and  Mr.  [William 
Smith]  Shaw  were  for  striking  out,  and  Mr.  [William]  Tudor  [Jr.]  and  Mr.  [James] 
Savage  for  retaining.  A  vote  was  taken,  when  there  appeared  three  for  each  side, 
and  the  Vice  President  [John  Thornton  Kirkland]  gave  it  for  retaining."  Journal 
of  the  Anthology  Society  (Howe),  225.  Thacher  wrote,  and  without  doubt  repre- 
sented the  general  view:  "We  have  indeed  no  wish  to  disguise  our  sentiments  on 
the  political  career  of  Mr.  Adams.  We  have,  on  this  subject,  no  sympathy  with  him 
whatever.  We  see  and  lament  that  the  orb  of  his  political  glory  has  become  dark  — 
Irrevocably  dark,  total  eclipse: 
Without  all  hope  of  day.  —  Samson  Agonistes" 

He  excused  this  expression,  "lest  the  praise  we  may  be  bound  in  justice  to  bestow, 
should  lose  its  value  by  being  supposed  to  proceed  from  political  friends."  And  at 
the  close  of  the  review  the  writer  lamented  that  Adams  had  turned  from  the  walks 


5i4  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

once  heard  of  it,  and  my  curiosity  had  naturally  been  ex- 
cited. The  author  may  say  what  he  will  about  his  political 
antipathy  to  me,  I  take  him  to  have  had,  even  while  he  was 
disclaiming  my  friendship,  a  SNEAKING  kindness  for  me.  As 
a  critic  he  would  doubtless  object  to  this  expression  as 
coarse,  and  in  an  "excessively  bad  taste."  But  on  the  other 
[hand,]  it  is  the  only  word  suited  to  the  thing.  He  may  take 
comfort  that  he  is  not  alone.  I  had  great  numbers  of  these 
secret  friends  among  my  dear  fellow  townsmen  of  Boston, 
who  in  defiance  of  their  own  consciences  were  joining  in 
the  hue  and  cry,  and  making  themselves  the  tools  of  my  real 
enemies.  If  the  day  should  ever  come  when  they  shall  think 
there  is  anything  to  be  got  by  my  friendship,  I  have  no  doubt 
they  will  be  as  officious  in  boasting  of  their  attachment  to  me, 
as  they  have  been  and  yet  are  in  disavowing  it.  I  have  had 
so  many  of  these  amiable  friends,  that  I  can  almost  say  in  the 
language  of  Shakespeare  'I  have  kept  of  them  tame."  It 
is  not  magnanimous  and  certainly  not  wise  to  quarrel  with 
human  nature  for  being  weak.  That  a  man  should  be  de- 
serted by  his  friends  in  the  time  of  trial  is  so  uniform  an  ex- 
perience in  the  history  of  mankind,  that  I  never  had  the 
folly  to  suppose  that  my  case  would  prove  an  exception  to  it. 
Admiral  Berkeley  brought  on  my  time  of  trial,  the  only  real 
one  that  has  happened  to  me  in  the  course  of  my  life,  and 
most  completely  was  I  deserted  by  my  friends  —  I  mean  in 
Boston  and  in  the  State  legislature.  I  can  never  be  suffi- 
ciently grateful  to  Providence  that  my  father  and  my  brother 

of  literature,  had  abandoned  "the  laurels  which  he  might  have  gained  without  a 
rival,  to  gather  a  barren  and  withering  chaplet  of  political  renown."  He  applied 
to  him  the  lines  of  Goldsmith,  as  a  man 

whose  genius  is  such 

We  scarcely  can  praise  it  or  blame  it  too  much; 
Who,  born  for  the  universe,  narrows  his  mind, 
And  to  party  gives  up  what  was  meant  for  mankind. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  515 

did  not  join  in  this  general  desertion.  There  were  exceptions 
in  the  town  of  Boston,  which  I  trust  I  shall  never  forget.  In 
the  legislature  not  one.  But  as  to  political  friends,  the  loss  of 
one  was  the  gain  of  another  quite  as  trusty  and  quite  as 
honest.  The  Junto-men,  whose  pretended  friendship  had 
never  been  anything  but  disguised  hatred,  I  considered  it 
fortunate  to  have  stripped  of  their  masks,  and  at  open 
enmity.  But  these  half-faced  fellowships,  these  prudent 
politicians  who  would  have  been  my  friends  if  they  had 
dared,  but  whose  credits  at  the  banks,  advertising  custom, 
or  corporation  favor,  depended  upon  their  disclaiming  me, 
have  made  their  friendship  fit  as  easy  upon  me  as  it  did  upon 
themselves. 

The  principal  faults  which  I  have  to  find  with  the  Anthol- 
ogy critique  is  for  its  excessive  praise.  Heaven  knows  that 
I  was  not  formed  of  materials  insensible  to  the  praise  of  my 
fellowmen,  but  I  cannot  relish  praise  from  a  quarter  which  I 
do  not  esteem,  and  I  cannot  esteem  the  man  who  can  de- 
grade himself  by  such  servile  sacrifices  to  popular  prejudices, 
as  the  Anthology  critic  has  gone  out  of  his  way  to  make  in 
reviewing  a  merely  literary  work.  If  he  had  no  sympathy 
with  my  politics,  it  is  at  his  own  peril.  If  he  believes  what 
he  says  of  my  high  character,  great  talents  and  private  vir- 
tues, what  call  was  there  upon  him  for  his  declaration  of  war 
against  my  politics?  Was  it  to  soothe  the  subscribers  to  the 
Anthology,  and  atone  for  the  commendation  of  an  heretic? 
Yes,  this  motive  is  sufficiently  discovered  and  almost  openly 
avowed,  and  in  my  scale  of  morality  it  is  a  motive  so  despic- 
able, that  I  would  not  give  a  straw  for  all  the  commendation 
that  such  a  panegyrist  could  bestow.  His  censure,  having 
relation  to  the  work,  is  partly  just,  and  partly  erroneous. 
For  a  book  of  instruction  the  lectures  are  in  a  style  too  ora- 
torical, or  if  you  please  too  declamatory.  I  purposely  in- 


Si6  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

dulged  myself  and  my  hearers  in  some  excess  of  this  kind,  for 
the  sake  of  riveting  their  attention  to  the  subject,  and  because 
I  know  that  superfluous  luxuriance  might  easily  be  pruned, 
and  that  barrenness  could  never  be  made  to  flourish.  This 
was  the  very  reason  which  made  me  reluctant  at  the  pre- 
mature publication  of  the  lectures,  for  I  knew  that  I  must 
abide  by  the  blame  which  they  would  bear  for  this  original 
sin.  My  recollection  of  Caesar's  oration  for  Archias,  as  he 
states,  was  inaccurate,  and  that  was  one  of  the  passages 
which  I  should  have  altered,  if  I  had  had  only  time  to  read 
them  over,  and  after  the  call  for  publication,  and  before  they 
were  published.  Incorrect  metaphors,  as  he  says,  abound 
in  every  part  of  the  book.  I  do  not  set  so  high  a  value  upon 
perfect  correctness  in  the  use  of  figures  as  Dr.  Blair  or  Mr. 
Addison  did,  and  their  correctness  is  much  more  perfect  in 
theory  than  in  practice.  Blair  has  shown  by  minute  analysis 
that  Addison's  "  Pleasures  of  the  Imagination,"  and  Swift's 
"Proposal  for  improving  the  English  Language,"  abound  in 
every  part  of  them  in  incorrect  figures,  and  I  think  I  have 
shown  that  Mr.  Blair  has  no  distinct  idea  of  the  difference 
between  figurative  and  literal  language,  insomuch  that  he 
quotes  two  of  the  most  figurative  passages  in  all  Virgil  as 
examples  of  pure  simplicity  without  figures.  Correctness  is 
always  cold  and  tame;  and  although  I  never  write  incor- 
rectly on  purpose,  I  suppose  a  multitude  of  incorrectnesses 
to  escape  me,  and  sometimes  let  them  pass  even  after  detect- 
ing them  myself.  These  are  crumbs  for  small  critics  to  feed 
upon.  The  passage  attempting  to  illustrate  the  different 
modes  of  reasoning  by  ratiocination  and  induction  is,  perhaps, 
as  he  objects,  still  somewhat  obscure.  I  think  I  understand 
it  myself,  but  that  lecture  was  one  of  those  with  which  I  was 
most  dissatisfied,  and  it  is  probably  one  of  the  worst  in  the 
book.  I  could  easily  defend  most  of  the  other  passages  with 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  517 

which  he  finds  fault,  but  as  a  whole  the  work  must  defend 
itself  or  fall.  If  it  should  ever  go  to  a  second  edition,  it  can 
doubtless  be  made  more  correct,  but  it  must  live  or  die  by 
the  soundness  or  defects  of  its  vital  parts,  and  they  must 
stand  the  test  of  sterner  judges  than  the  critic  of  the  An- 
thology. 

To  return  to  my  politics.  I  find  that  of  all  the  American 
newspapers  the  Boston  Centinel  is  that  which  most  frequently 
gives  me  token  of  remembrance  in  my  absence.  Among 
other  obliging  notices  I  find  the  editor  has  informed  the 
world,  uhow  ill  calculated  our  townsman  is  for  the  splendid 
and  intriguing  Court  of  St.  Petersburg."  As  a  commentary 
to  show  you  how  accurately  his  correspondents  have  been 
acquainted  with  my  condition  here,  and  how  justly  they 
have  represented  it,  I  must  give  you  in  the  original  lan- 
guage, which  my  father  or  my  brother  will  translate  for  you, 
an  extract  from  a  dispatch  of  the  Chancellor  of  the  Russian 
Empire  to  Mr.  Daschkoff,  which  that  gentleman  has  com- 
municated to  the  President  of  the  United  States:  "L'accueil 
qu'a  fait  PEmpereur  a  M.  Adams  a  du  le  convaincre  que,  si 
sa  destination  etait  agreable  a  sa  Majeste,  le  choix  de  sa 
personne  n'y  contribuait  pas  moins.  Recommendable  par 
le  nom  qu'il  porte,  ainsi  que  par  ses  qualites  personnelles, 
ses  titres  ont  ete  justement  apprecies  par  sa  Majeste  Im- 
periale.  Je  ne  doute  pas,  Monsieur,  que  son  Excellence  le 
President  des  Etats  Unis  n'en  ressente  une  satisfaction  per- 
sonelle  de  Pattention  de  sa  Majeste  Imperiale  a  son  choix." 

I  intreat  you,  however,  that  this  may  not  go  out  of  our  own 
family.  I  see  how  ungraciously  it  comes  from  myself,  and  I 
should  not  have  given  it  even  to  you,  but  for  the  compliment 
which  it  contains  to  my  father,  which  he  and  you  ought  to 
know,  and  which  to  my  heart  gives  to  the  whole  testimonial 
its  most  precious  value.  This  dispatch  was  dated  10/22 


Si8  THE  WRITINGS  OF 

November,  1809,  just  about  the  time  when  the  correspondent 
of  the  Centinel  was  making  the  discovery  "how  insignificant 
a  figure  our  townsman J:  was  making  at  St.  Petersburg. 
From  that  day  to  this  the  Emperor  has  treated  me  with  the 
same  kindness  and  attentions,  and,  what  is  much  more  im- 
portant, he  still  gives  a  welcome  reception  to  my  country- 
men, while  all  his  neighbors  have  excluded  them  from  their 
ports.  I  remain,  etc. 


FROM  JAMES  MADISON 

Private.  Washington,  October  16,  1810. 

DEAR  SIR: 

Previous  to  my  return  to  this  city,  I  received  a  letter  from  Mrs. 
Adams,  your  highly  respectable  mother,  communicating  your 
anxiety  to  leave  a  situation  rendered  insupportable  by  the  ruinous 
expenses  found  to  be  inseparable  from  it,  and  taking  it  for  granted 
that  you  had  written  or  would  write  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to 
the  same  effect.  The  answer  to  her  was,  that  as  it  was  not  the 
intention  of  the  executive  to  expose  you  to  unreasonable  sacrifices, 
it  could  not  withhold  a  permission  to  retire  from  them,  and  that 
you  would  be  so  informed  from  the  Department  of  State.  You 
will  accordingly  receive  a  letter  of  leave,  and  a  blank  commission, 
providing  for  the  care  of  our  affairs  till  a  successor  may  be  ap- 
pointed. As  no  communication  of  your  wishes,  however,  has  yet 
been  received  from  yourself,  I  cannot  but  hope  that  the  peculiar 
urgency  manifested  in  the  letter  of  Mrs.  Adams  was  rather  hers, 
than  yours;  or  that  you  have  found  the  means  of  reconciling  your- 
self to  a  continuance  in  your  station.  Besides  that  confidence  in 
the  value  of  your  services  which  led  to  the  call  upon  them,  there 
are  considerations  which  you  will  readily  appreciate,  bearing 
against  a  sudden  return  from  a  short  mission,  the  occasion  for 
which  has  been  made  the  subject  of  so  much  lucubration.  Among 
them  is  the  difficulty  of  shielding  the  step  against  unfavorable 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  519 

conjectures  as  to  its  cause  in  the  mind  of  the  Emperor;  and  the 
evil  might  become  the  greater  from  the  possibility  of  a  protracted 
intermission,  if  not  entire  discontinuance,  of  the  representation  of 
the  United  States  at  St.  Petersburg,  corresponding  with  the  grade 
of  the  Russian  minister  here.  It  will  for  this  reason  be  particularly 
expedient,  in  case  you  should  make  immediate  use  of  the  docu- 
ment sent  you,  to  spare  no  pains  in  guarding  against  a  miscon- 
struction of  your  departure,  and  in  preparing  the  Russian  govern- 
ment for  a  delay  in  filling  the  vacancy,  which  may  be  unavoidable, 
notwithstanding  the  purpose  of  preventing  it.  As  far  as  assurances 
of  unabated  friendship  here  can  be  of  aid  to  you,  they  may  be 
given  with  every  emphasis  which  the  sincerity  of  these  sentiments 
can  warrant. 

I  will  add  that  whilst  I  do  not  disguise  my  wish  that  the  con- 
tinuance of  your  valuable  services  may  be  found  not  inconsistent 
with  your  other  and  undeniable  duties,  I  cannot,  on  the  other 
hand,  wish  that  the  latter  should  be  sacrificed  beyond  a  reasonable 
measure;  and  within  that  measure,  I  am  entirely  persuaded  that 
your  patriotism  will  cheerfully  make  the  sacrifice. 

Accept  my  sincere  respects  and  friendly  wishes, 

JAMES  MADISON. 

TO  WILLIAM  GRAY 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  8/20  October,  1810. 
DEAR  SIR: 

.•*•«.« 

Almost  all  the  profitable  mercantile  business  of  St.  Peters- 
burg is  commission  business.  The  merchants  therefore  are 
all  commission  merchants.  The  first  object  of  their  ambition 
is  to  obtain  consignments,  and  their  great  address  consists 
in  making  the  most  of  them.  The  American  business  has 
heretofore  been  monopolized  by  a  few  houses,  and  in  some 
instances,  unless  all  the  information  that  I  have  obtained 


520 


THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 


here  on  this  matter  is  erroneous,  has  fallen  into  bad  hands. 
The  practices  by  which  some  houses  are  said  to  have  en- 
riched themselves  upon  the  plunder  (for  it  deserves  no  better 
name)  of  their  correspondents  in  America,  are  numerous  and 
have  not  always  escaped  detection.  Until  within  these  two 
years  the  amount  of  American  business  was  comparatively 
small,  and  few  of  the  Americans  who  came  here  knew  how 
their  affairs  were  really  transacted.  As  the  houses  who  en- 
grossed all  the  consignments  were  much  connected  with  one 
another,  you  will  easily  perceive  how  they  could  sink  the 
price  currents  of  cargoes  to  be  sold,  and  raise  the  market  of 
those  to  be  purchased,  more  according  to  the  level  of  their 
own  interests  than  to  those  of  their  consigning  friends.  The 
principal  houses  purchase  on  their  own  accounts,  when  the 
prices  are  at  the  lowest  ebb,  immense  provisions  of  all  the 
articles  of  export.  The  instant  an  American  vessel  is  re- 
ported to  have  arrived  at  Cronstadt,  down  go  the  prices  of 
whatever  she  brings,  and  up  start  those  of  the  Russian  ex- 
ports. Then  the  consignee  furnishes  his  friend  with  a  cargo 
from  his  own  stores  at  the  increased  price,  or  gives  higher 
than  the  current  price  in  market  for  part  of  the  supply,  in 
order  to  charge  the  remainder  at  the  same  price  from  his 
own  warehouses.  These  are  among  the  fairest  and  most 
honest  artifices  of  the  trade.  But  I  have  been  told  of  simu- 
lated sales  which  some  consignees  make  to  themselves;  of 
pretended  payments  of  hush  money  at  the  custom  house, 
charged  sometimes  to  the  amount  of  many  thousand  rubles 
under  the  name  of  extra  charges,  but  never  paid  in  reality, 
only  pocketed  by  the  consignee;  of  twenty  thousand  rubles 
offered  to  a  supercargo  for  the  favor  of  transacting  his  owner's 
business;  of  purchases  made  with  the  funds  of  a  correspond- 
ent and  for  him  by  his  order,  but  refused  to  be  delivered  six 
months  after,  because  in  the  interval  a  great  advance  had 


1810]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  521 

taken  place  in  the  price  of  the  article  purchased;  of  ostensible 
accounts  of  purchase,  sale  and  charges,  totally  different  from 
the  real  transactions  at  the  expense  of  the  consignee,  and  a 
list  of  and-so-forths  all  in  the  same  style.  If  your  business 
here  in  future  should  bear  any  comparison  in  amount  with 
what  it  has  been  the  present  year,  I  feel  perfectly  assured 
that  you  would  find  it  highly  for  your  interest  to  have  an 
agent  of  your  own  to  superintend  the  transactions  of  all  your 
business,  and  that  it  would  require  a  person  not  only  of  in- 
corruptible integrity,  but  active,  intelligent  and  conversant 
with  the  ways  and  means  of  the  merchants  at  this  place. 


TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  11/23  October,  1810. 
MY  DEAR  BROTHER: 

»•••••• 

I  have  always  rejoiced  at  the  mode  which  chance  much 
more  than  design  gave  me  of  a  correspondence  from  Amer- 
ica, but  there  is  no  escaping  one's  destiny,  and  I  have  been 
abused  in  the  newspapers,  both  for  putting  the  nation  to  the 
enormous  expense  of  a  frigate  to  transport  my  'precious  carcase 
across  the  ocean,  and  for  landing  at  Cronstadt  from  a  mer- 
chant vessel  loaded  with  sugar  and  coffee.  How  deeply  ven- 
omous must  be  the  feelings,  and  how  scanty  must  be  the  food 
for  them  to  subsist  upon,  which  can  feed  upon  such  sub- 
stances as  these.  Perhaps  one  half  the  ministers  of  the 
United  States,  who  have  come  to  Europe  since  the  declara- 
tion of  Independence,  have  come  in  frigates,  and  never  a 
syllable  was  lisped  at  the  expense.  The  other  half  have 
come  in  merchant  vessels,  and  nobody  ever  heard  how  they 
landed,  or  of  what  the  cargoes  of  the  ships  were  composed. 


522  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

May  such  always  be  the  reproaches  of  my  enemies,  and  may 
they  never  have  anything  worse  to  object  against  me. 

True  it  is,  that  while  the  insignificance  of  the  American 
minister's  appearance  is  the  subject  of  sarcasm,  the  theme  is 
copious,  and  would  be  ludicrous  in  proportion  to  the  details 
into  which  a  person  acquainted  with  his  style  of  living  here 
and  that  of  other  ministers  might  enter.  Compare  him  for 
instance  with  a  French  Ambassador  who  expends  nearly 
three  hundred  thousand  dollars,  and  you  may  judge  how  he 
must  show.  Compare  him  with  the  ministers  of  petty 
principalities  whose  names  are  scarcely  known  to  you,  and 
the  lowest  of  whose  salaries  are  equivalent  to  twenty  thou- 
sand dollars  a  year,  and  you  may  rely  upon  it  he  does  not 
shine.  He  cannot  associate  upon  terms  of  equality  either 
with  the  other  foreign  ministers,  or  with  the  court  nobility 
of  the  country,  or  even  with  the  merchants  who  are  making 
enormous  fortunes  by  American  consignments  of  "sugar  and 
coffee;"  and  to  complete  the  picture  it  must  be  added,  that 
from  all  these  three  classes  of  society  he  has  received  the 
most  pointed  and  most  oppressive  attentions,  oppressive  I 
call  them,  for  the  utter  impossibility  with  his  means  of 
meeting  them  by  the  return  which  they  so  justly  deserve. 
But  he  knows  that  to  indulge  but  for  a  moment  that  honest 
pride  which  is  uneasy  until  it  has  reciprocated  obligations  of 
hospitality,  would  be  total  ruin  to  him  and  his  family.  He 
therefore  limits  his  expenditures  to  his  allowance  from  his 
country,  shines  as  much  as  he  can  in  those  circles  of  society 
with  whose  splendor  he  cannot  vie,  and  lives  almost  entirely 
retired  within  the  bosom  of  his  own  family.  This  you  may 
say  is  not  very  diplomatic,  but  it  is  absolutely  necessary  as 
you  say  "to  steer  clear  of  the  breakers" 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  523 

TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  25  October,   1810. 
MY  DEAR  MOTHER: 

•  •••••• 

Russia  and  England  being  at  war,  the  commercial  inter- 
course between  them  is  of  course  forbidden,  and  neither 
English  vessels  nor  English  subjects  are  allowed  to  come  into 
the  Russian  territories.  You  already  know  that  one  of  the 
expedients  by  which  the  English  have  attempted  to  evade 
these  prohibitions  was  by  presenting  themselves  as  Ameri- 
cans, with  forged  passports  and  ship's  papers.  The  Russian 
government  admit  universally  every  American  recognized 
as  such  by  the  American  minister  or  consul.  This  business, 
since  I  have  been  here,  continues  as  it  was  before  to  be  trans- 
acted by  Mr.  Harris,  the  consul,  who  never  fails,  however, 
to  consult  me,  and  take  my  opinion  in  every  case  susceptible 
of  a  question.  I  had  not  been  here  a  week  before  I  was  asked 
to  authenticate  a  paper  purporting  to  be  a  passport  of  the 
Mayor  of  New  York,  and  an  eminent  merchant  of  this  city 
sent  me  in  writing  his  guarantee,  that  the  man  named  in  the 
passport  was  a  native  citizen  of  the  United  States.  The  pass- 
port was  forged  in  London  by  a  Jew  named  Van  Sander,  who 
had  kept  there  a  shop  for  neutral  papers  for  several  years, 
and  the  man  named  in  it  was  a  Liverpool  trader,  who  had 
never  set  his  foot  in  the  United  States.  You  very  naturally 
perceive  that  I  not  only  refused  the  authentication  desired 
of  me,  but  that  I  did  not  entirely  suppress  a  sentiment  of 
indignation  at  the  imposition  that  was  attempted  to  be 
practised  upon  me  by  the  guarantor. 

Within  a  fortnight  afterwards  two  ships  entered  with 
registers  of  the  same  Van  Sander  fabrication.  They  were 
detected  by  Mr.  Harris,  who  laid  the  papers  before  me,  and 


524  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

who  duly  informed  the  Russian  government  that  they  were 
forged.  The  vessels  with  their  cargoes  were  confiscated  and 
their  papers  delivered  to  Mr.  Harris,  who  has  sent  them  to 
the  Department  of  State.  In  this  he  acted  entirely  with 
my  countenance  and  approbation,  which  under  a  weight  of 
mercantile  influence  existing  here  in  favor  of  these  frauds  was 
undoubtedly  useful,  if  not  necessary  to  him.  I  certainly 
did  let  it  be  understood  by  all  the  merchants  of  St.  Peters- 
burg and  of  the  other  Russian  ports,  that  forged  papers  pre- 
tended to  be  American  should  find  neither  connivance  nor 
mercy  from  me,  whenever  they  should  come  to  my  knowl- 
edge, although  this  determination  so  explicitly  manifested 
did  not  recommend  me  to  the  favor  of  Englishmen  in  this 
part  of  the  world  not  even  to  that  of  the  merchants  of  St. 
Petersburg.  I  do  sincerely  believe  that  had  it  not  been  for  it, 
the  real  American  flag  would  long  before  this  have  been  ex- 
cluded from  the  ports  of  Russia,  as  it  has  been  from  those  of 
Denmark  and  Prussia. 

I  have  heard  by  an  American  gentleman,  who  was  in  Lon- 
don at  the  time  when  the  news  of  these  disasters  to  the  Amer- 
icans of  the  Van  Sander  stamp  arrived  there,  the  consterna- 
tion which  they  occasioned  among  the  gang  of  banditti  who 
had  been  driving  that  trade,  and  the  bitterness  of  their  gall 
against  the  meddling  American  minister.  But  I  have  had 
no  more  forged  passports  with  guarantees  sent  to  me  to  be 
authenticated,  and  only  two  or  three  more  of  Mr.  Van 
Sander's  registers  have  appeared  in  the  Russian  ports  during 
the  present  year.  They  have  met  the  same  fate  with  their 
predecessors.  But  the  story  that  I  examined  all  the  papers 
of  vessels  myself,  or  that  I  ever  meddled  with  them,  unless 
at  the  request  of  Mr.  Harris,  of  the  Russian  government,  or 
of  the  persons  to  whom  the  papers  belong,  is  a  mere  fabrica- 
tion totally  destitute  of  truth. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  525 

My  real  offence,  therefore,  has  been  in  contributing  to  the 
exclusion  of  persons,  vessels  and  cargoes  really  English,  but 
coming  with  the  forged  signatures  and  seals  of  the  public 
officers  of  my  country.  And  the  editors  of  American  news- 
papers, who  have  copied  from  their  English  fellow  laborers 
columns  of  abuse  for  this  conduct,  pretend  that  the  charge 
of  British  influence  over  them  is  a  calumny. 

In  speaking  of  the  American  influence  here  in  favor  of 
these  frauds  it  may  be  proper  to  explain  myself  further.  The 
merchants  of  St.  Petersburg  are  almost  all  foreigners;  great 
numbers  of  them  are  English,  or  connected  with  English 
houses.  Their  business  is  almost  exclusively  commission 
business.  They  universally  detest  this  war  with  England, 
and  long  for  the  restoration  of  the  commercial  intercourse 
with  that  country.  They  want  the  trade,  and  they  care  not 
under  what  flag  or  what  papers  it  comes  and  goes.  The 
American  flag  and  American  papers  would  have  been  the 
most  convenient  of  all  their  shelters,  and  under  the  liberal 
confidence  with  which  the  Russian  government  admitted 
every  vessel  and  person  coming  from  friendly  countries  and 
recognized  by  the  American  minister  or  consuls  as  Americans, 
if  our  countenance  could  have  been  obtained,  instead  of 
fifty  or  sixty  vessels  from  Teneriffe  which  have  come  to 
Russia  for  confiscation  under  all  sorts  of  papers  excepting 
American,  we  might  have  seen  five  hundred  direct  from  the 
London  market,  both  of  merchandize  and  of  papers.  The 
inevitable  and  just  consequence  of  which  would  have  been, 
that  the  true  Americans  would  have  been  confounded  with 
the  false,  and  all  of  them  involved  in  one  general  proscrip- 
tion. 


526  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  27  October,  1810. 
MY  DEAR  BROTHER: 

On  the  principle  of  returning  a  separate  answer  or  reply 
to  every  letter  that  I  receive  from  you,  I  remain  yet  one  in 
arrears  to  you,  since  in  my  last  I  acknowledged  the  receipt 
of  two,  dated  27  March  and  7  May. 

With  the  last  dated,  but  first  received  of  those,  came  the 
number  of  the  Anthology  containing  the  most  learned  critique 
upon  my  lectures.  It  reminded  me  of  a  famous  speech  of 
which  I  have  heard,  said  to  have  been  delivered  in  the  Massa- 
chusetts Convention  for  deciding  upon  the  federal  consti- 
tution, a  speech  in  which  the  orator,  after  enumerating  the 
principal  objections  which  were  then  made  against  that 
national  compact,  concluded  by  saying  'for  these  reasons, 
Mr.  President,  I  shall  vote  for  the  adoption  of  this  Consti- 
tution." But  I  have  written  to  my  mother  my  opinions  of 
this  notable  performance,  and  that  was  taking  quite  as 
much  notice  of  it  as  it  deserved.  A  thousand  such  reviews 
will  do  my  book  neither  good  nor  harm.  But  our  giants  of 
literature  are  waiting  to  see  what  the  English,  and  especially 
what  the  Scottish  reviewers,  will  say,  to  know  whether  the 
work  is  good  for  anything  or  not,  and  that  most  unlucky 
episode  about  Lord  Holland  which  crept  so  unaccountably 
into  the  Silesian  letters,  I  know  will  secure  me  another 
scratch  from  the  titillating  fingers  of  Edinburgh.  Lord  Hol- 
land it  seems  is  himself  one  of  the  lashes  of  that  cat  of  nine 
tails  the  Edinburgh  Review,  and  that  circumstance  explained 
the  vindictive  rancor  with  which  they  scourged  those  let- 
ters.1 

1  The  article,  by  Francis  Homer,  appeared  in  the  Edinburgh  Review,  V.  180. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  527 

Their  fortune  has  certainly  far  exceeded  their  pretensions, 
for  besides  the  English  edition  of  them  they  were  dealt  out 
again  in  driblets  by  half  a  dozen  English  magazines,  and  they 
have  had  the  honor  of  being  translated  into  French  and 
German,  and  in  both  of  those  languages  have  been  about  as 
much  abused  as  they  were  in  English.  I  presume  that  the 
lectures  will  at  least  be  spared  in  other  languages  than  their 
own. 

Ever  since  I  have  been  this  time  in  Europe  packets  of  news- 
papers have  come  to  me  by  almost  every  vessel  that  has 
arrived  from  Boston,  made  up  and  forwarded  to  me  by 
Young  and  Minns,  the  editors  of  the  Palladium.  This  oblig- 
ing attention,  which  has  often  furnished  me  the  most  recent 
intelligence  from  America,  has  been  the  more  unexpected 
and  indeed  surprising  to  me,  as  I  find  that  in  their  own  paper 
they  spare  me  as  little  as  before  I  left  home,  and,  like  the 
other  federal  prints,  readily  circulate  any  scurrility  upon  me 
from  what  quarter  soever  it  may  come.  At  any  rate  I  am 
obliged  to  Messrs.  Young  and  Minns  for  the  trouble  they 
have  taken  to  send  me  the  papers,  and  must  ask  you  to 
thank  them  in  my  name  for  their  kindness.  I  would  send 
them  some  newspapers  in  return,  if  there  were  any  published 
here  that  they  could  read,  or  that  could  reach  them  in  time 
to  give  them  any  news.  But  I  wish  them  to  be  assured  that 
if  I  have  no  immediate  opportunity  to  return  their  favor,  I 
am  not  the  less  sensible  of  it. 

•  •••••• 

We  had  yesterday  the  first  levee,  or  as  they  call  it  here 
diplomatic  circle,  since  the  return  of  the  Imperial  family 
from  their  summer  residence  in  the  country.  I  presented 
Mr.  Jones  at  court.1  It  was  the  Empress  mother's  birth- 
day, and  in  the  evening  there  was  a  French  opera  perform- 

JT.  K.  Jones,  Adams,  Memoirs,  October  9,  1810. 


528  THE  WRITINGS  OF 

ance  at  the  theatre  of  the  Hermitage.  All  the  ministers  of 
the  corps  diplomatique  received  tickets  of  admission  to  this 
performance,  which  was  a  thing  without  example  in  the 
present  reign.  Mrs.  Adams  received  also  a  ticket,  and  as 
there  is  now  no  other  foreign  minister's  lady  at  St.  Peters- 
burg, that  she  might  [not]  be  alone,  the  Emperor  expressly 
ordered  that  a  ticket  should  also  be  sent  to  her  sister  Cath- 
erine, although  she  has  not  been  presented  at  court.  The 
Hermitage  theatre  is  in  the  Palace  which  bears  that  name, 
and  the  French  company  of  players  occasionally  perform 
there  by  the  Emperor's  command.  The  tickets  of  admission 
are  distributed  as  he  directs,  and  are  confined  to  his  own  court 
and  to  ambassadors.  This  was  the  only  instance  in  which 
ministers  of  the  second  order  have  ever  received  an  invitation 
there.  You  are  sufficiently  acquainted  with  monarchical 
governments  to  know  how  every  human  being  that  surrounds 
a  sovereign,  from  a  prime  minister  to  a  scullion,  catches  the 
tone  of  the  master  in  the  treatment  of  persons,  and  while  I 
and  my  family  shall  receive  such  marks  of  attention  as  these, 
trifling  as  they  are  in  themselves,  you  may  make  yourself 
quite  easy  about  my  qualifications  for  the  splendid  and 
intriguing  court  of  Russia,  and  even  about  the  figure  which 
we  made  on  our  landing  at  Cronstadt.  I  have,  indeed,  in 
the  course  of  the  summer  received  proofs  far  otherwise  im- 
portant than  these,  of  the  Emperor's  friendly  disposition 
towards  the  United  States,  and  if  I  have  not,  as  I  certainly 
have  not,  the  means  of  turning  to  the  greatest  possible 
benefit  of  my  country  these  favorable  sentiments,  both  to- 
wards my  nation  and  myself,  the  fault  is  not  mine.  I  have 
yet  a  trying  winter  to  go  through,  and  I  have  reason  to  ex- 
pect that  the  next  summer  will  prove  no  less  so;  but  at  this 
moment  you  may  be  assured  that  the  only  object  of  my  con- 
cern is,  that  circumstances  which  I  cannot  control  may  oc- 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  529 

casion  us  to  lose  some  of  the  favor  in  which  we  now  stand. 
This  may  be  unavoidable.  I  had  seen  before  the  receipt  of 
your  letter  the  judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United 
States  in  the  case  of  Fletcher  and  Peck,  which  had  given  me 
great  pleasure.  I  am  so  little  used  to  hear  anything  like  an 
acknowledgment  from  those  whom  I  have  favored,  that  the 
gratification  of  my  feelings  is  the  greater  when  I  find  it 
given.  I  was  therefore  delighted  to  learn  from  you  that  Mr. 
Peck  attributes  the  success  of  that  cause  to  my  exertions  at 
the  preceding  session  of  the  court.  I  do  not  make  this  gen- 
eral observation  by  way  of  complaint.  I  settled  it  as  a  prin- 
ciple at  a  very  early  period  of  my  life,  and  expressed  it  in  one 
of  my  performances  at  an  exhibition  while  at  college,  that 
we  must  serve  our  fellowmen  from  a  nobler  motive  than  the 
expectation  of  their  gratitude  in  return,  and  that  we  must 
never  take  it  as  a  disappointment  when  we  experience  the 
failure  of  that  gratitude.  I  hope  I  have  always  acted  up  to 
this  principle,  and  when  I  have  met  with  grateful  returns,  I 
have  always  considered  it  as  so  much  of  my  positive  enjoy- 
ment gained  which  was  not  to  have  been  expected. 

My  dear  boys  are  never  out  of  my  thoughts.  Your  ac- 
count of  John's  x  rapid  improvement  in  learning  to  read  was 
a  banquet  to  my  soul.  There  are  so  many  things  that  I 
want  them  to  learn  that  I  can  scarcely  wait  with  proper 
patience  for  the  time  when  they  ought  to  be  taught  them. 
I  presume  they  are  now  with  you,  and  am  sure  they  will  have 
all  the  kind  care  and  attention  both  of  yourself  and  of  your 
wife.  I  have  already  expressed  to  you  my  anxiety  with 
regard  to  George's  handwriting  and  his  French.  I  wish  him 
to  begin  immediately  to  write  letters,  and  to  be  required  to 
write  them  entirely  from  his  own  head,  though  he  should 
have  some  assistance  to  correct  the  spelling.  Letter  writing 

1  John  Adams,  born  in  Boston,  July  4,  1803. 


530  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

is  but  learnt  by  practice,  and  upon  every  letter  that  he  writes 
or  receives  you  can  lead  him  by  a  few  short  remarks  to  dis- 
cern the  true  characters  of  the  epistolary  style.  But  while 
he  is  made  to  pursue  his  sedentary  studies  with  all  the  as- 
siduity which  he  can  bestow  upon  them,  I  wish  him  also  to 
be  inured  to  bodily  fatigues  and  even  hardships.  Let  him 
have  no  effeminate  indulgencies,  no  cockering,  no  encour- 
agement to  the  anticipations  of  a  life  of  indolence,  and  ease, 
and  enjoyment.  Let  his  sports  and  amusements  even  be 
of  the  hardy  kind,  which  partake  as  much  of  labor  as  of 
pleasure.  Teach  him  courage  and  discretion  blended  to- 
gether in  the  same  lessons.  How  much  I  ask  you  to  do  for 
him,  and  how  easy  it  is  to  ask!  The  best  of  all  possible  educa- 
tions I  know  is  but  a  lottery,  and  without  a  corresponding 
disposition  in  the  child,  all  that  you  can  do  for  him  is  but 
labor  lost.  Let  us  do,  however,  all  that  we  can  and  leave  the 
result  to  Providence.  I  am,  etc. 


TO  EZEKIEL  BACON 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  3  November,  1810. 
MY  DEAR  SIR: 

Ever  since  the  4th  of  July,  1809,  I  have  had  upon  file  a 
letter  from  you  of  the  preceding  2Qth  of  June,  with  the  in- 
tention of  making  to  it  the  reply  to  which  on  many  accounts 
it  was  justly  entitled.  It  was  one  of  the  earliest  notices  which 
I  received  of  my  exile,  as  you  termed  it,  to  this  place,  and  the 
subjects  to  which  it  relates,  amidst  the  rapid  changes  so 
peculiar  to  these  times  in  the  political  world,  have  not  yet 
altogether  lost  their  interest. 

The  motives  for  the  mission  to  St.  Petersburg  were,  to- 
gether with  almost  everything  else,  misrepresented  by  one 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  531 

of  our  political  parties,  and  not  very  accurately  estimated  by 
the  other.  They  were  founded  in  the  considerable  and  in- 
creasing commercial  relations  between  the  two  countries, 
and  in  the  peculiarly  friendly  sentiments  of  the  present 
sovereign  of  Russia  towards  the  United  States.  This  mis- 
sion, and  its  reciprocation  by  a  Russian  minister,  whom 
before  the  receipt  of  this  letter  I  presume  you  will  have  seen 
at  Washington,  have  probably  contributed  to  that  difference 
which  has  marked  the  conduct  of  Russia  towards  the  trade 
of  the  United  States,  from  that  which  has  been  exhibited 
by  the  other  northern  states  of  Europe,  and  by  all  the  gov- 
ernments under  the  direct  influence  of  France.  There  is  not 
only  a  most  remarkable  coincidence  between  the  commercial 
policy  of  Russia  and  of  the  United  States,  but  at  the  present 
time  a  full  conviction  of  that  coincidency  in  the  minds  of 
those  who  govern  this  country.  My  only  concern  is  that  we 
shall  not  avail  ourselves  so  much  as  we  might  of  the  op- 
portunity afforded  us,  to  settle  some  permanent  principles, 
which  might  survive  the  changes  of  mind  to  which  all  gov- 
ernments are  subject,  and  especially  those  under  the  domin- 
ion of  one  absolute  sovereign. 

Your  political  struggles  of  the  last  winter  were  such  as 
must  have  been  anticipated  from  the  moment  that  the  Brit- 
ish government  disavowed  the  arrangement  which  had  been 
concluded  by  Mr.  Erskine.  The  English  party  in  our  country 
seems  to  have  ventured  beyond  its  depth  to  such  a  length, 
that  the  people  even  in  New  England  would  no  longer  follow 
them.  I  say  even  in  New  England,  because  south  of  that, 
or  at  least  of  New  York,  the  national  feeling  had  always 
been  too  decided  to  admit  of  a  contest  with  foreign  influence, 
and  the  people  had  never  encouraged  the  avowal  of  a  bias 
towards  England,  which  our  eastern  sages  have  lately  gloried 
in,  as  if  they  really  thought  it  a  virtue.  So  long  as  the  people 


532  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

[hold]  by  their  steadiness  to  themselves,  it  will  perhaps  be  a 
public  benefit  that  those,  who  ought  to  be  always  in  the 
minority,  should  be  so  ready  to  proclaim  their  own  shame. 

Notwithstanding  all  the  vexations  and  depredations  to 
which  our  commerce  during  the  present  year  has  been  ex- 
posed, I  presume  it  will  upon  the  whole  prove  profitable, 
even  to  our  merchants.  The  issue  which  has  been  opened  to 
the  principal  productions  of  our  agriculture  has  been  im- 
mense, and  the  farmers  and  planters  suffer  comparatively 
little  from  the  injustice  of  foreign  nations  and  princes.  Our 
government  I  trust  will  adhere  inflexibly  to  the  system  of 
neutrality,  which  henceforth  I  expect  will  not  be  difficult. 
That  alone  will  preserve  our  independence  amidst  all  the 
European  revolutions.  The  war  against  colonial  articles  of 
merchandise  will,  in  all  probability,  be  continued  at  least 
another  year,  and  at  present,  having  assumed  the  form  of 
heavy  duties,  it  may  be  more  troublesome  than  it  has  been 
in  the  shape  of  prohibition,  or  even  of  confiscation.  But  they 
will  eventually  make  their  way  through  that,  as  they  have 
through  the  others.  It  appears  not  improbable  that  one 
ultimate  result  of  the  present  war  will  be  the  total  dissolution 
of  the  European  colonial  system.  France  has  lost  all  her 
colonies.  Holland  no  longer  exists.  Spain  has  every  pros- 
pect of  being  irrevocably  severed  from  all  her  transatlantic 
possessions,  and  Portugal  has  already  by  the  removal  of 
her  royal  family  to  Brazil  made  way  for  a  second  independent 
power  in  the  western  hemisphere.  England  alone  remains 
with  her  colonies,  but  they  will  be  of  little  use  to  her  in  that 
relation,  when  the  two  American  continents,  and  all  the  im- 
portant islands  of  the  West  Indies,  will  be  opened  to  the 
trade  of  all  the  world.  It  is  impossible  that  all  this  should  be 
restored  at  the  peace. 

The  north  of  Europe  has,  during  the  present  year,  been 


isio]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  533 

the  scene  of  some  important  events,  the  most  remarkable  of 
which  have  occurred  in  Sweden.  While  a  French  general 
has  been  elected  as  the  successor  to  the  throne  of  that  king- 
dom, its  former  sovereign  has  been  a  wanderer  in  Switzerland 
and  Germany,  until  he  came  to  Russia,  and  about  a  fort- 
night since  embarked  at  Riga  on  board  an  English  armed 
vessel  for  England.  The  principal  forces  of  Russia  have 
been  engaged  in  an  active  and  bloody  war  with  the  Turks 
and  Persians.  To  extend  the  Russian  frontier  to  the  shores 
of  the  Danube,  two  Turkish  provinces  have  been  incor- 
porated with  the  Russian  empire,  and  several  strong  for- 
tresses on  the  south  side  of  the  Danube  have  been  taken.  A 
new  order  for  recruiting  the  armies  has  been  issued  requiring 
a  levy  of  three  men  upon  every  five  hundred  throughout 
the  Empire.  It  will  raise  an  addition  of  about  one  hundred 
thousand  men  to  the  present  military  force  of  the  country. 

I  suppose  you  are  in  Massachusetts,  now  in  the  midst  of 
your  elections  for  the  next  Congress,  and  I  hope  that  our 
country  will  still  have  the  benefit  of  your  services.  At  all 
events  I  take  the  liberty  to  remind  you  of  the  obliging  prom- 
ise contained  in  the  letter  to  which  I  now  reply,  that  I  should 
enjoy  the  advantage  of  your  correspondence.  The  proceed- 
ings of  Congress  during  the  session,  and  the  prospects  of 
our  country  and  prevailing  sentiments  of  the  people  during 
the  recess,  will  furnish  subjects  always  entertaining  to  me, 
when  you  find  them  suitable  to  your  own  leisure  and  con- 
venience; and  if  from  these  polar  climes  I  can  give  you 
nothing  of  equal  value  in  return,  I  can  at  least  assure  you  a 
punctual  correspondent  in  your  very  sincere  friend,  etc.  1 

1  "The  new  tariff  [on  colonial  articles  in  Germany  and  Holland]  spreads  like  a 
leprosy,  and  renders  the  Berlin  and  Milan  decrees  altogether  useless.  It  strikes 
more  effectually  both  at  English  and  neutral  trade  than  the  decrees,  and  makes  all 
discrimination  of  flags  unnecessary.  What  the  French  government  meant  by 


534  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

No.  31.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  1/13  November,  1810. 

SIR: 

The  last  American  vessel  which  arrived  at  Cronstadt  this 
season,  was  the  Lion,  Captain  Bainbridge.  The  same  vessel, 
together  with  one  belonging  to  Boston,  sailed  for  the  United 
States  on  the  first  of  this  month,  and  they  were  the  last  that 
can  go  before  the  next  year.  The  river  Neva  is  already  full 
of  ice,  the  bridges  between  the  several  parts  of  the  city 
divided  by  the  river  are  taken  away  and  in  two  or  three  days 
more  will  be  replaced  by  the  natural  bridge  of  the  season. 
From  this  time  until  next  June  I  shall  have  it  in  my  power 
to  write  to  you  only  by  occasional  and  indirect  convey- 
ances. .  .  . 

saying  that  the  Emperor  had  granted  licenses  only  to  American  vessels  I  do  not 
know.  With  the  duties  of  the  tariff  it  is  very  little  consequence  under  what  flag  the 
goods  are  imported.  A  few  single  vessels  may  arrive,  pay  those  duties,  and  make 
still  a  profit  upon  the  voyage,  but  in  a  very  short  time  it  must  result  in  a  struggle 
between  fraud  and  force,  between  contraband  and  confiscation."  To  Joseph  Pit' 
cairn,  November  i,  1810.  Ms. 

"The  revocation  of  the  decrees  of  Berlin  and  of  Milan,  and  the  Emperor  Na- 
poleon's declaration  of  love  for  the  Americans,  have  not  been  followed  by  measures 
remarkably  characteristic  of  that  sentiment.  The  exclusion  of  all  American  vessels 
from  the  ports  of  Denmark,  Mecklenburg  and  Prussia,  of  which  the  governments 
of  those  countries  were  the  passive  and  unwilling  instruments,  was  precisely  con- 
temporaneous with  the  honied  words  of  the  Duke  of  Cadore  in  his  letter  to  General 
Armstrong  of  5  August.  Of  the  efforts  which  have  been  made  to  produce  a  similar 
order  here  I  have  given  you  regular  and  repeated  information.  These  efforts  are 
still  continued,  and  by  the  prohibitions  against  the  importation  of  certain  articles,  and 
the  aggravations  of  duties  upon  others  which  I  think  will  be  adopted  before  the  com- 
mencement of  the  next  year's  navigation,  I  apprehend  they  will  be  partially  successful" 
To  the  Secretary  of  State,  November  6,  1810.  Ms. 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  535 

The  port  of  Gothenburg  is  indeed  now  the  only  point  of 
steady  and  regular  communication  between  all  the  northern 
part  of  the  continent  of  Europe  and  England.  It  has  also 
been  the  resort  of  a  great  number  of  American  vessels. 
Many  of  the  Americans  who  have  been  there  have  mentioned 
it  as  a  circumstance  not  without  considerable  inconvenience 
that  there  is  no  consul  there  from  the  United  States,  the 
consul  who  formerly  resided  there  having  died  two  or  three 
years  ago.  The  consular  business,  as  they  represent  it,  has 
been  transacted  by  a  Mr.  Dickson,  an  Englishman,  who  was 
his  clerk  or  partner,  and  into  whose  hands  his  official  papers 
and  consular  seal  fell  after  his  decease.  His  connections  ac- 
cording to  their  accounts  are  much  more  with  England  than 
with  the  United  States;  and  if  in  assuming  the  exercise  of 
the  consular  powers  after  the  death  of  the  consul,  he  has  not 
used  them  for  improper  purposes,  he  has  at  least  not  detected 
and  exposed  the  abuse  of  our  flag,  which  in  some  cases  has 
come  to  his  knowledge.  It  may  not  only  be  of  very  material 
importance  that  a  native  American  should  be  appointed  as 
consul  at  Gothenburg,  but  I  take  this  occasion  to  suggest 
that  our  consular  system  in  general  deserves  the  very  par- 
ticular attention  of  the  government.  Among  other  things 
it  would  be  advisable  that  they  should  all  be  expressly  in- 
structed to  oppose  by  all  proper  means  the  impositions 
which  are  so  constantly  attempted  to  be  practiced  under 
false  American  colors  and  papers.  I  have  heard  of  a  num- 
ber of  American  vessels  which  have  been  sold  with  all  their 
papers,  and  which  are  now  sailing  about  the  world,  and 
producing  their  American  registers  whenever  it  suits  them 
to  wear  the  American  flag,  although  they  are  owned  wholly 
in  England  and  by  English  merchants.  The  Manhattan  of 
New  York,  and  the  Two  Friends  of  Charlestown  have  been 
mentioned  to  me  by  name,  as  being  in  that  predicament. 


536  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

The  papers  of  some  of  the  vessels  condemned  in  the  Danish 
Admiralty  Courts  have  been  after  their  condemnation  taken 
from  the  files  of  the  court,  and  sold  to  anybody  that  would 
purchase  them.  One  vessel  with  papers  thus  purchased 
came  last  summer  to  Cronstadt,  of  which  Mr.  Harris  has 
given  you  information.  She  was  not  however  admitted  to 
an  entry.  The  papers  of  the  ship  Commerce  of  Philadelphia, 
condemned  by  the  court  of  Christiania  in  Norway,  were  sold 
and  resold  in  open  market  at  Christiansand  until  as  I  am 
told  Mr.  Jackson  obtained  possession  of  them.  If  the  war 
should  continue  much  longer,  and  abuses  of  this  kind  are 
tolerated  and  connived  at  by  persons  acting  or  assuming  to 
act  under  the  authority  of  the  United  States,  it  may  be 
taken  for  a  certainty  that  our  own  commerce  will  eventually 
bear  the  penalty. 

As  our  consular  system  (setting  aside  the  consuls  to  the 
Barbary  powers)  allows  the  officer  no  pecuniary  compensa- 
tion, it  would  not  be  required  that  he  should  abstain  from 
engaging  himself  in  commercial  transactions;  but  while  the 
consuls  are  merchants,  and  while  commerce  of  all  kinds  is 
in  that  cramped  and  unnatural  state  which  marks  the  present 
times,  you  will  immediately  perceive  the  allurements  and 
the  opportunities,  which  the  American  consuls  throughout 
Europe  will  have  to  favor  and  even  to  partake  of  illicit  trade. 

They  have  I  believe  a  discretionary  power  of  appointing 
vice  consuls  and  agents  at  the  ports  where  they  reside  and 
in  all  the  ports  within  the  limits  allotted  them.  The  mer- 
chants of  the  country  to  promote  private  interests  of  their 
own  are  often  very  solicitous,  and  sometimes  emulous  of 
these  subordinate  appointments,  and  I  understood  it  had 
been  a  practice  among  our  consuls  to  sell  them  either  for  a 
settled  sum  annually,  or  by  stipulating  for  a  portion  of  the 
profits  both  of  consular  business  and  of  commercial  consign- 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  537 

ments  which  the  vice  consul  or  agent  thus  appointed  re- 
ceives. They  do  not  generally  conceive  themselves  bound  to 
any  obligation  of  residence  at  the  place  for  which  they  are 
appointed,  and  whenever  their  own  affairs  call  them  away 
they  absent  themselves,  sometimes  for  years,  sometimes 
even  without  any  intention  of  returning,  and  leave  in  their 
stead  a  vice  consul  or  agent  well  disposed  to  make  the  con- 
sulate profitable  to  himself,  but  having  very  little  connection 
with  or  concern  about  the  United  States. 

It  is  very  desirable  that  these  things  should  be  reduced 
to  some  more  regular  and  permanent  principles,  and  I  beg 
leave  to  recommend  it  to  the  consideration  of  the  govern- 
ment, whether  it  would  not  be  proper  to  provide  by  law; 
I.  That  the  consular  commissions  should  be  limited  in  time  — 
say  to  four  years,  but  renewable  either  by  the  mere  issuing  of 
a  new  commission  or  by  a  new  appointment  like  the  marshals 
of  the  judicial  districts.  2.  That  the  power  of  the  consuls  to 
appoint  vice  consuls  or  consular  agents,  be  subject  to  the 
confirmation  or  approbation  of  the  President  of  the  United 
States;  and  that  with  respect  to  the  persons  upon  whom 
they  may  confer  such  appointments,  they  should  receive 
standing  instructions  from  the  President  or  the  Department 
of  State. 

3.  That  some  rule  of  residence  at  the  place  to  which  they 
are  appointed  should  be  laid  down  for  them.  It  is  not  nec- 
essary that  this  rule  should  be  extremely  rigorous;  but  for 
any  absence  for  more  than  three  months,  I  should  think 
they  ought  to  be  required  to  obtain  the  permission  of  the 
President;  and  to  have  good  reasons  to  assign  for  it.  4.  That 
in  case  of  the  decease  of  consuls  there  should  be  prescribed 
some  course  of  proceeding  for  the  security  of  their  official 
papers,  of  the  documents  in  their  offices,  and  of  their  public 
seals. 


538  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

5.  That  it  should  be  made  their  duty  to  correspond  with 
the  Department  of  State  and  of  the  Treasury  more  frequently 
than  has  heretofore  been  the  usage.  I  speak  of  this  however 
principally  from  conjecture. 

Perhaps  some  supplementary  measures  may  be  found 
necessary  to  guard  against  the  English  forgeries  of  American 
ships'  papers.  As  you  have  had  several  of  these  forgeries 
before  you,  I  presume  it  has  already  become  a  subject  of 
consideration  to  the  President  and  therefore  shall  only  permit 
myself  to  observe,  that  the  prompt  and  decisive  discrimina- 
tion between  the  genuine  and  spurious  American  papers  has 
been  the  great,  if  not  the  only  effectual  cause  of  the  unre- 
stricted admission  of  our  vessels  into  the  Russian  ports,  while 
they  have  been  excluded  from  almost  all  others  in  the  north 
of  Europe.  .  .  . 

TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  16/28  November,  1810. 
MY  DEAR  MOTHER: 

I  received  a  few  days  ago,  and  since  I  wrote  you  last,  a 
letter  from  Captain  William  Welsh,  dated  at  Liebau,  a  Rus- 
sian port  in  the  Baltic,  to  which  I  suppose  he  came  on  rinding 
that  all  American  vessels  were  excluded  from  the  port  to 
which  he  was  originally  destined.  He  inclosed  to  me  at  the 
same  time  your  kind  letter  of  25th  July.  In  the  obstructed 
state  of  navigation  in  the  Baltic  I  have  scarcely  ever  re- 
ceived a  letter  from  America  in  less  than  four  months  from 
its  date,  and  from  the  acknowledgments  of  my  correspond- 
ents I  find  that  our  letters  have  been  still  longer  in  reaching 
them.  I  am,  however,  continually  reminded  by  the  receipt 
of  letters  from  you  of  your  punctuality  and  attention  as  a 
correspondent.  I  hear  of  letters  as  late  as  the  6th  of  Sep- 


iSio]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  539 

tember,  but  excepting  yours  I  have  myself  received  none 
later  than  June. 

We  had  already  heard  of  the  death  of  President  Webber 
at  the  time  of  Mr.  Jones's  arrival.  But  it  is  much  to  be  re- 
gretted, as  from  the  present  state  and  complexion  of  affairs 
the  prospect  is  not  bright  of  seeing  his  place  supplied  by  so 
good  a  man.  My  own  affections  as  well  as  my  judgment 
would  incline  in  favor  of  Mr.  Ware.1  But  I  think  very  highly 
of  the  talents  and  of  the  temper  of  Dr.  Kirkland.  My  great- 
est apprehension  from  him  would  be  the  very  circumstances 
which  perhaps  will  contribute  most  to  his  election.  I  mean 
his  political  connections.  It  has  become  a  fashionable  doc- 
trine of  late  years  that  the  College  should  be  turned  into  a 
political  engine,  a  doctrine  which  I  altogether  disapprove, 
and  I  am  very  much  afraid  that  the  late  alteration  in  the 
constitution  of  the  college  government  arose  from  party 
motives.  Of  this  alteration,  not  having  seen  it  in  its  full 
extent,  I  cannot  speak  positively,  but  by  advertisements  in 
the  newspapers  I  should  infer  that  the  connection  between 
the  legislature  of  the  Commonwealth  and  the  University 
has  been  formally  dissolved.  The  Senate  and  Council 
formerly  constituted  a  part  of  the  Board  of  Overseers,  and 
the  Congregational  clergymen  of  the  six  neighboring  towns 
were  the  other  part.  Instead  of  which  there  are  now  chosen 
fifteen  laymen.  I  should  conceive  that  a  liberal  and  com- 
prehensive spirit  would  seek  to  make  the  most  ancient  in- 
stitution for  the  education  of  youth  in  our  country  venerable 
in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  and  that  by  thus  attaching  the  pub- 

» 

lie  authority  of  the  State  and  the  ministers  of  religion  by 
ties  of  duty  to  the  interests  and  welfare  of  the  College,  one 
of  the  most  natural  and  happy  expedients  for  that  purpose 

1  Henry  Ware,  who  had  been  Adams'  monitor  in  the  University.    Kirkland  re- 
ceived the  election,  November  14,  1810. 


S4o  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

had  been  devised.  From  the  wise  and  profound  policy  of 
this  idea,  to  that  of  fifteen  laymen  chosen  by  a  caucus,  there 
is  in  my  mind  a  lamentable  falling  off,  and  there  must  be 
some  extraordinary  benefit  of  which  I  am  not  aware  attached 
to  the  administration  of  those  fifteen  laymen,  to  compensate 
for  the  loss  which  the  University  must  sustain,  by  discharg- 
ing the  legislative  and  executive  authorities  of  the  State 
from  all  superintendence  over  its  affairs,  and  by  removing 
the  clergy  thus  completely  from  that  superintendence.  .  .  . 
The  River  Neva  has  been  frozen  over  about  a  fortnight, 
and  has  about  five  months  longer  to  remain  in  the  same  con- 
dition. We  have  already  had  several  days  nearly  as  cold  as 
our  most  rigorous  days  in  America.  Within  the  house,  how- 
ever, we  feel  nothing  of  this  severity.  Double  windows, 
double  doors  and  stove  fires  keep  our  apartments  at  the  exact 
temperature  that  we  choose  to  have  them.  It  is  the  fashion 
of  the  country  to  keep  a  thermometer  in  almost  every  room 
and  chamber  of  the  house,  and  at  the  same  time  another 
fastened  to  a  window  outside.  The  scale  in  most  common  use 
is  that  of  Reaumur;  Fahrenheit's  is  not  used  at  all.  Gener- 
ally dining  rooms  and  parlors  are  kept  at  15  degrees  of 
warmth  (65  degrees  of  Fahrenheit),  bedchambers  at  about 
12,  or  60  of  Fahrenheit's.  It  is  considered  as  a  general  rule 
that  for  healthiness  the  bedchamber  must  be  kept  cooler 
than  any  other.  There  is  a  stove  in  every  chamber,  and  in 
the  houses  laid  out  for  comfort  or  luxury  one  in  the  entry. 
In  large  halls  there  are  usually  two,  and  sometimes  four.  A 
fire  is  made  once  a  day  in  every  stove,  but  when  the  weather 
is  very  mild,  some  of  the  stoves  are  suffered  to  pass  unheated 
every  other  day.  The  wood  is  precisely  of  the  same  kind  as 
the  eastern  wood  so  much  used  at  Boston.  The  stove  is 
heated  in  the  manner  of  an  oven,  and  when  the  wood  is  con- 
sumed to  a  coal  without  flame,  the  chimney  passage  is  cov- 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  541 

ered  over  with  an  iron  cap  like  the  lid  of  a  pot.  The  walls 
of  the  houses  are  about  three  feet  thick.  The  external  win- 
dows hang  upon  hinges  in  the  form  of  folding  doors.  The 
glass  is  very  large,  the  panes  in  most  common  use  are  25  or 
26  inches  long  and  19  wide.  The  internal  window  consists 
of  six  such  squares  in  a  single  frame,  which  is  put  up  in 
September,  and  taken  down  in  May,  and  when  put  up,  the 
crevices  all  round  the  sash  are  stuffed  with  tow  and  paper  is 
pasted  entirely  round  the  borders.  But  for  the  sake  of 
ventilation  one  corresponding  square  of  both  the  windows  is 
made  like  a  door  on  separate  hinges,  and  may  be  opened  at 
pleasure.  The  sash  of  this  square  is  therefore  larger  than 
that  of  the  rest,  and  gives  an  irregular  and  awkward  ap- 
pearance to  the  windows.  For  that  reason  perhaps  it  has 
acquired  the  name  of  a  zvas-ist-das,  meaning  in  German 
what's  that.  In  many  houses  there  are  windows  of  two  single 
panes,  each  six  or  seven  feet  long  and  twenty  inches  wide, 
and  in  hinged  frames  folding  together  like  doors. 

There  are  two  remarkable  differences  between  the  severe 
winter  weather  of  this  country  and  that  of  our  own.  The 
first  is  that  here  there  are  no  violent  snow  storms.  It  snows 
an  hour  or  two  almost  every  day  in  October,  November 
and  December,  and  continues  through  the  winter  occasion- 
ally to  snow  in  the  same  manner.  But  scarcely  ever  does  it 
snow  for  five  or  six  hours  together,  and  a  fall  of  snow  of  a 
foot  deep  at  one  time  is,  I  believe,  without  example.  The 
snow  here  drifts  comparatively  very  little;  once  fallen  it  lies 
the  whole  winter  and  receiving  so  frequently  a  fresh  powder- 
ing it  settles  and  cakes  into  a  substance  between  ice  and  snow, 
which  by  the  month  of  March  gets  to  be  three  or  four  feet 
thick.  But  it  lays  almost  entirely  on  a  level  until  the  break- 
ing up  of  the  frost  in  March  or  April.  The  streets  of  St. 
Petersburg  are  then  scarcely  passable.  The  second  pecu- 


542  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

liarity,  which  mitigates  the  rigor  of  this  climate,  is  that  the 
extremest  colds  are  always  accompanied  with  a  clear  sky, 
and  little  or  no  wind.  If  with  an  atmosphere  of  30  degrees  of 
Reaumur  below  o,  which  is  67  degrees  of  Fahrenheit  below 
the  freezing  point,  there  were  at  the  same  time  a  wind  like 
our  northwest  gales,  I  believe  human  nature  could  not  exist 
under  it. 

We  are  all  well.  As  this  sentence  is  worth  a  volume  in 
every  letter  which  we  receive  from  home,  so  I  trust  it  is  the 
most  acceptable  thing  that  we  can  write  to  you  in  return.  I 
know  not  how  or  when  I  shall  have  an  opportunity  to  send 
you  this,  but  I  write  it  now  to  have  it  in  readiness  by  the 
first  opportunity  that  may  offer.  They  sometimes  present 
themselves  suddenly,  and  I  have  then  barely  time  to  prepare 
my  public  letters. 

The  last  political  event  which  has  excited  attention  was 
the  Emperor  Napoleon's  decree  to  burn  all  the  English  man- 
ufactures upon  which  his  custom  house  or  his  military  troops 
can  lay  their  hands.1  The  state  of  commerce  throughout 

1  "At  the  time  when  the  Emperor  Napoleon  conditionally  repealed  the  decrees 
of  Berlin  and  Milan,  he  was  inclined  to  peace,  and  if  the  British  ministers  had  been 
wise,  they  would  have  taken  step  for  step.  They  chose  to  set  up  a  cry  of  victory, 
and  to  return  a  fair  advance  of  liberality  with  an  evasion,  as  it  regarded  America, 
and  an  insult  to  France.  This  threw  him  into  a  new  rage,  and  he  has  returned 
with  aggravated  rigor  to  his  continental  system.  Whether  he  will  eventually  in- 
jure England  by  it  is  yet  very  doubtful;  but  he  will  ruin  great  multitudes  of  people 
by  it  upon  this  continent,  and  he  will,  as  he  has  done,  prey  upon  the  American  com- 
merce, wherever  he  can  lay  his  hands  upon  it."  To  Abigail  Adams,  5/17  Decem- 
ber, 1910.  Ms. 

"The  English  government  not  having  thought  fit  to  revoke  their  Orders  in  Coun- 
cil after  the  conditional  revocation  by  France  of  the  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan, 
the  French  Emperor  is  determined  to  make  a  new  effort  to  cut  off  the  commerce 
between  Great  Britain  and  the  continent  of  Europe.  On  the  iQth  of  October  he 
issued  a  decree  that  all  English  manufactured  goods  existing  in  warehouses  or  cus- 
tom houses,  in  France,  Holland,  Spain,  Italy,  Naples,  the  Illyrian  provinces,  or 
wherever  French  troops  could  reach  the  land,  should  be  seized  and  burnt.  The 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  543 

Europe  continues  to  be  excessively  distressed,  and  will  prob- 
ably be  much  more  so  before  it  will  experience  any  relief. 
Our  countrymen  still  rush  in  crowds  into  every  port  where 
they  can  obtain  access,  and  into  many  where  they  meet 
nothing  but  seizure  and  confiscation.  There  are  twenty  or 
twenty-five  vessels  which  were  coming  here,  at  a  season 
when  no  mortal  European  dares  venture  into  the  Gulf  of 
Finland;  only  one  of  them  reached  Cronstadt,  and  that  while 
the  river  was  freezing.  The  rest  have  entered  the  Reval, 
Riga,  and  other  ports  of  the  Baltic.  Some  have  not  yet  been 
heard  of.  I  hope  however  that  none  of  them  have  been 
lost.  I  am,  etc. 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  33.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  I  December,  1810. 
SIR: 

Since  the  close  of  the  navigation  at  this  place  more  than 
twenty  American  vessels  bound  to  Cronstadt  and  last  from 
Gothenburg  have  arrived  at  the  ports  of  Liebau,  Baltic- 
port,  Riga  and  Reval,  into  which  they  were  compelled  to 

excessive  duties  upon  colonial  merchandise  fixed  by  his  decree  of  5  August  have 
been  prescribed  by  all  the  governments  under  his  influence;  and  as  this  will  probably 
not  frighten  the  English  into  compliance  with  his  wishes,  by  the  abandonment 
of  their  system,  you  must  be  prepared  for  another  and  more  aggravated  series  of 
vexations  upon  commerce  the  next  year.  In  the  present  aspect  of  affairs,  if  I  can 
take  the  liberty  of  advising  you,  it  will  be  not  to  trust  your  property  with  any  of 
the  ports  under  his  dominion,  by  which  I  mean  every  country  where  he  dictates 
decrees,  as  well  as  those  where  he  issues  them.  Among  them  I  particularly  include 
Denmark  and  Prussia.  Of  Sweden  I  cannot  positively  speak.  The  French  official 
gazettes  already  scold  about  the  admission  of  English  vessels  at  Gothenburg,  and 
there  is  now  a  French  general  settled  at  Stockholm,  as  the  successor  to  the  throne 
of  Sweden."  To  William  Gray,  November  16,  1810.  Ms. 


544  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

enter  by  the  impossibility  of  proceeding  farther  up  the  Gulf 
of  Finland.  One  only,  a  vessel  in  ballast,  found  its  way  as 
far  as  Cronstadt.  These  vessels  formed  a  part  of  a  convoy 
of  five  or  six  hundred  sail  which  left  Gothenburg  on  the  yth 
of  October,  and  entered  the  Baltic  by  the  passage  of  the 
Belt.  On  their  arrival  at  the  several  ports  which  I  have  men- 
tioned their  papers  were  transmitted  to  the  Commission  for 
Neutral  Navigation  at  St.  Petersburg,  and  several  of  those 
which  first  arrived  were  admitted  without  difficulty.  But 
as  their  numbers  increased  a  suspicion  appears  to  have  arisen 
either  that  they  were  English  vessels,  or  from  English  ports, 
and  a  subsequent  order  was  issued  to  suspend  the  admis- 
sion of  those  which  had  not  been  admitted,  and  the  unload- 
ing of  the  cargoes  of  those  which  had,  until  further  orders, 
and  to  send  the  papers  to  St.  Petersburg  for  further  exam- 
ination. This  order  having  excited  some  uneasiness  and 
alarm  among  the  persons  interested  in  these  vessels  and 
cargoes,  some  of  them  applied  to  me  for  interference  in  their 
behalf,  and  last  evening  I  had  an  interview  with  the  Chan- 
cellor, Count  Romanzoff,  on  the  subject.  He  said  he  sup- 
posed the  occasion  of  the  suspicion  which  had  arisen  was  that 
those  vessels  belonged  to  the  great  convoy  from  Gothenburg 
which  had  been  so  long  signalized  by  the  Emperor  Napoleon. 
I  assured  him  that  I  was  fully  satisfied  that  the  vessels  of 
which  a  list  had  been  furnished  me  were  bonafide  Americans, 
and  that  their  papers  were  correct;  that  by  several  of  them  I 
had  received  letters  from  my  friends  in  the  United  States; 
that  the  captain  of  one  and  the  supercargoes  of  others  were 
personally  known  to  me;  that  the  owners  of  almost  all  of 
them  were  also  known  to  me,  either  by  reputation  or  as  re- 
spectable citizens  of  the  United  States,  and  that  I  had  such 
information  respecting  them  all,  as  left  no  doubt  in  my  mind 
that  they  were  real  Americans.  The  Count  intimated  that 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  545 

under  these  circumstances  the  obstacles  to  their  admission 
would  easily  be  removed,  and  requested  me  to  write  him  a 
line  without  official  formality  containing  the  statement  I  had 
verbally  made  to  him,  and  promised  to  lay  it  before  the  Em- 
peror. I  have  accordingly  this  day  written  him  the  letter, 
of  which  I  enclose  herewith  a  translation. 

The  Count  then  entered  into  general  conversation  and  asked 
me  to  give  him  candidly  my  opinion  with  regard  to  the  two  meas- 
ures lately  adopted  by  the  Emperor  Napoleon:  1st,  the  tariff  oj 
duties  upon  colonial  articles  of  $th  August;  and  2ly,  the  auto 
da  fe  (this  was  the  Count's  own  expression),  meaning  the  decrees 
of  IQ  October,  for  burning  all  the  English  merchandise,  upon  the 
European  continent  within  the  reach  of  the  French  troops.  He 
wished  me  to  say  what  I  thought  would  be  the  general  operation 
of  these  measures  upon  England  on  the  one  hand,  and  upon  the 
continent  on  the  other.1 

I  told  him  that  in  speculating  upon  the  probable  effects  of 
the  tariff,  it  seemed  to  me  that  the  first  would  be  a  mo- 
mentary and  considerable  replenishment  of  the  public  coffers, 
by  a  measure  in  the  highest  degree  oppressive  upon  individ- 
ual merchants.  That  a  second  would  be  a  great  diminution 
of  consumption  of  the  articles  thus  overburthened  with 
taxation.  That  a  third  would  be  a  tax  of  unexampled  sever- 
ity upon  the  people,  the  mass  of  consumers,  levied  upon 
many  articles  of  primary  necessity.  And  a  fourth  would  be 
a  great  increase  of  contraband  trade,  which  I  did  not  believe 
the  Emperor  Napoleon,  with  all  his  power,  could  prevent. 
That  with  regard  to  the  burning  decree,  it  would  distress  and 
perhaps  ruin  great  numbers  of  merchants  upon  the  continent, 
to  whom  a  large  proportion  of  the  merchandise  thus  con- 
sumed will  unquestionably  belong,  and  will  shock  as  it  has 
shocked  the  moral  feelings  of  mankind,  who  can  never  be 

1  Cypher. 


546  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

made  to  relish  the  policy  of  wantonly  destroying  objects  of 
labor  and  ingenuity  contributing,  some  to  the  subsistence, 
and  all  to  the  comfort  and  enjoyment  of  human  life.  They 
will  naturally  say,  seize  and  confiscate  the  property  of  your 
enemy  if  you  will,  but  destruction  is  the  policy  of  a  Vandal. 
That  as  to  the  operation  of  either  or  both  these  measures 
upon  England,  I  did  not  believe  it  would  be  so  great  as  the 
Emperor  Napoleon  appeared  to  expect,  and  that  I  believed  he 
had  a  very  exaggerated  idea  in  general  of  the  effect  which 
could  be  produced  by  such  measures  upon  the  councils  of 
the  British  government.  No  doubt  many  merchants  would 
be  ruined;  many  commercial  houses  would  become  bank- 
rupt, but  the  proportion  of  failures  to  the  mass  of  existing 
trade  would  be  small,  and  it  would  not  be  felt  by  the  nation 
to  an  extent  that  would  either  alarm  or  dispirit  them  into 
petition  for  peace.  Indeed  it  might  very  probably  happen 
that  the  decree  for  burning  goods  of  English  manufacture 
would  prove  useful  to  the  manufacturers  themselves  by  in- 
creasing the  demand  for  the  articles,  as  it  was  a  well  known 
practice  of  the  Dutch  formerly  in  India  to  burn  great  quan- 
tities of  the  spices  of  the  country,  to  raise  the  price  of  what 
remained.  That  the  operation  of  these  measures  on  the 
continent  would  be  at  least  as  distressing  as  it  could  be  in 
England.  It  would  ruin  as  many  individuals,  occasion  as 
many  bankruptcies,  and  would  fall  upon  people  whose  com- 
mercial resources  were  far  inferior  to  those  of  the  merchants 
in  England.  That  there  was  a  sympathy  of  commercial  in- 
terest which  was  paramount  to  all  political  hostility.  The 
merchants  of  two  countries  between  whom  there  existed 
commercial  relations  were  in  fact  only  the  brokers  between 
the  buyers  and  sellers,  they  had  a  common  interest,  and  it 
was  impossible  to  break  a  great  merchant  in  London  without 
breaking  at  the  same  time  merchants  in  Hamburg,  Amster- 


iSiol  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  547 

dam,  St.  Petersburg  and  even  Paris.    That  at  this  moment 
the  distress  of  the  merchants  at  all  these  places  was  well 
known  to  him.    It  was  extreme.    The  failures  were  numer- 
ous; they  would  soon  be  still  more  so.    They  were  the  result 
of  these  measures.     And  yet  the  people  were  everywhere 
obliged  to  endure  these  things  without  daring  even  to  ask 
for  peace.    In  England  the  case  was  the  same.    No  minister 
in  that  country  would  dare  to  make  peace  until  it  should  be 
called  for  by  the  voice  of  the  people  in  petitions  from  the 
counties  and  cities.     It  was  thus  that  the  peace  had  been 
forced  upon  the  government  after  the  American  war.     It 
was  thus  that  the  peace  of  Amiens  had  been  procured.    Be- 
fore the  French  invasion  of  Spain,  the  spirit  of  petitioning 
for  peace  had  begun  strongly  to  show  itself  in  several  counties 
of  England,  but  now  not  a  whisper  of  that  kind  was  heard. 
//  the  British  ministry  had  dreaded  the  effect  of  these  measures 
they  would  immediately  have  proposed  an  abandonment  of  the 
Berlin  and  Milan  decrees,  and  secured  it  by  revoking  their 
Orders  in  Council.     This,  however,  they  had  not  chosen  to  do, 
and  they  must  have  foreseen  and  been  prepared  for  whatever 
the  power  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon  could  accomplish  in  conse- 
quence of  their  adhering  to  their  system. 

The  Count  listened  with  attention  to  these  observations,  but 
he  neither  expressed  his  own  assent  to  these  opinions,  nor  his 
dissent  from  them,  so  unreservedly  as  he  has  done  on  some  former 
occasions  of  a  similar  kind.  I  gave  him  my  opinion  the  more 
unreservedly,  because  I  knew  the  French  government  had  very 
recently  demanded  the  adoption  of  the  same  measures  here.  This 
demand  also  extended,  as  I  have  heretofore  informed  you,  to  the 
exclusion  of  all  American  vessels,  which  has  been  decisively  re- 
fused. The  dispositions  and  inclinations  of  the  Emperor  and 
of  Count  Romanwff  with  regard  to  the  commercial  relations  with 
the  United  States  still  remain  firm  and  unaltered;  but  beyond 


548  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

all  doubt  our  commerce  here  will  be  next  year  much  more  re- 
stricted and  much  less  favored  than  it  has  been  at  present.  It  is 
perfectly  obvious  that  the  Emperor  Napoleon's  continental  sys- 
tem can  have  no  considerable  effect  against  England  while  any 
one  of  the  northern  European  states  remains  exempt  from  the 
effect  of  his  measures;  nor  while  American  vessels  laden  with 
colonial  articles  obtain  access  to  the  Continent  without  being 
subjected  to  his  tariff.  The  auto  da  fe  if  performed  here,  would 
do  us  neither  good  nor  harm;  but  I  think  it  will  not  be  tried. 
But  the  tariff \  I  strongly  apprehend,  and  most  especially  upon 
the  articles  of  sugar  and  coffee.  .  .  . 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

No.  34.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  December  5/17,  1810. 
SIR: 

Last  Thursday  week  being  the  festival  of  St.  Catherine, 
there  was  a  diplomatic  circle  or  court  held  at  the  imperial 
palace.  Meeting  Count  Romanzoff  there,  I  spoke  to  him  of 
the  letter,  which  I  had  written  to  him,  respecting  the  admis- 
sion of  the  American  vessels  which  have  arrived  at  several 
Russian  ports  in  the  Baltic  and  Gulf  of  Finland,  since  the 
close  of  the  navigation  here  prevented  their  arrival  at  Cron- 
stadt,  to  which  they  were  destined.  I  sent  you  a  translation 
of  this  letter  with  my  last  number. 

The  Count  told  me,  that  he  had  already  laid  my  letter 
before  the  Emperor,  who  had  permitted  him  to  refer  it  to 
the  Minister  of  Commerce.  But  no  more  of  the  vessels  have 
yet  been  admitted.  The  Commission  for  Neutral  Naviga- 
tion have  received  orders  to  suspend  the  examination  of  the 
papers,  and  the  Emperor  has  ordered  the  subject  to  be  re- 


isio]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  549 

ferred  to  the  decision  of  the  Imperial  Council.  In  the  mean 
time  an  article  in  the  Paris  Moniteur  has  already  pronounced 
that  none  of  the  vessels  belonging  to  the  great  convoy  from 
Gothenburg  will  be  admitted  into  Russia.1 

At  the  time  when  the  French  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs 
transmitted  to  General  Armstrong,  the  conditional  revoca- 
tion of  the  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan,  there  were  various 
indications  of  an  approximation  towards  peace  between 
France  and  England.  The  furious  passions,  which  on  both 
sides  swell  the  tempest  of  this  war,  were  obviously  beginning 
to  subside.  Count  Metternich,  the  Prime  Minister  of  the 
Austrian  Empire  had  been  from  the  time  of  the  Emperor 
Napoleon's  marriage  at  Paris  for  the  express  purpose  of  pro- 
moting a  negotiation  for  peace,  and  through  him  propositions 
to  that  effect  had  been  transmitted  between  France  and 
England.  An  English  negotiator,  Mr.  McKenzie,  had  during 
the  same  time  been  residing  at  Morlaix,  ostensibly  to  effect 
an  exchange  of  prisoners;  and  precisely  at  the  same  time, 
when  the  Duke  de  Cadore  sent  his  letter  to  General  Arm- 
strong, it  was  announced  that  the  cartel  for  the  exchange 
was  concluded.  At  that  moment,  I  believe,  had  the  British 
ministry  been  inclined,  they  might  have  obtained  a  peace 
upon  more  advantageous  terms  than  will  ever  come  within 
their  reach  again.  Instead  of  improving,  however,  this  fav- 
orable opportunity,  they  filled  their  newspapers  with 
triumphant  exultations  at  the  change  of  system  proposed  by 
France,  and  the  Marquess  Wellesley,  recognizing  the  promise 
so  often  made  by  the  British  government  to  renounce  the 
system  which  had  been  professed  to  be  merely  retaliatory 
upon  those  decrees,  whenever  they  should  be  removed,  post- 
poned further  the  performance  of  this  engagement  in  a 
manner,  to  say  the  least,  more  calculated  to  raise  the  resent- 

1  Cypher. 


550  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 

ment  than  to  conciliate  a  further  relaxation  of  hostility  on 
the  part  of  France.  This  proceeding  appears  to  have  pro- 
duced in  the  mind  of  the  French  Emperor  a  determination 
to  make  a  last  effort  to  cut  off  effectually  the  commercial 
communication  between  Great  Britain  and  the  continent  of 
Europe.  Just  at  that  time  began  to  assemble  in  Wingo 
Roads,  just  below  Gothenburg,  a  convoy  of  vessels  destined 
to  the  Baltic,  which  was  continually  increasing  until  it 
amounted  to  more  than  six  hundred  sail  at  the  beginning  of 
October.  It  was  soon  signalized  by  the  Emperor  Napoleon 
(to  use  the  expression  of  Count  Romanzoff).  An  article  in 
the  Moniteur,  early  in  the  month  of  September,  complained, 
that  this  intercourse  with  England  permitted  by  the  way  of 
Gothenburg  was  incompatible  with  the  engagements,  which 
Sweden  had  contracted  in  the  treaty  of  peace  with  France. 
An  official  article  in  the  Swedish  gazette  answered,  that 
Sweden  had  faithfully  performed  the  engagement  of  her 
treaty  with  France,  and  that  no  English  vessels  were  ad- 
mitted into  her  ports;  but  that  the  Roads  below  Gothenburg 
were  not  so  commanded  by  fortifications  on  the  land  as  to 
make  it  possible  to  prevent  English  vessels  from  assembling 
there. 

Count  Metternich  remained  at  Paris  until  October,  but 
found  it  impossible  to  devise  any  basis  for  a  negotiation, 
on  which  France  and  England  would  agree.  England  could 
not  treat  without  her  allies  of  Spain  and  Portugal,  and  yet 
in  the  negotiation  for  exchange  of  prisoners  refused  to  re- 
deem the  Spaniards  and  Portuguese  taken  acting  in  concert 
with  her  armies:  France  would  not  hear  of  any  Spanish  or 
Portuguese  negotiators  for  peace,  and  yet  insisted  that  the 
Spanish  and  Portuguese  prisoners,  should  be  taken  in  ex- 
change for  Frenchmen,  prisoners  in  England,  upon  an  equal 
footing  with  the  English  themselves.  All  the  negotiations 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  551 

were  broken  off  and  Count  Metternich  returned  to  Vienna, 
having  accomplished  nothing  but  a  treaty  for  removing  a 
sequester  upon  certain  landed  estates,  which  had  been  seized 
with  the  territories  of  the  Prince  of  the  Rhenish  Confedera- 
tion, at  the  commencement  of  the  last  war  between  France 
and  Austria. 

Then  came  the  decree  of  19  October  for  seizing  and  burn- 
ing all  the  merchandize  of  English  produce  or  manufacture 
within  the  reach  of  French  troops  in  any  part  of  the  European 
continent.  The  same  measure  was  demanded  not  only  of 
the  Princes  of  the  Rhenish  League,  but  of  the  sovereigns  who 
still  retain  their  independence,  of  Austria,  and  of  Russia, 
both  of  which  have  declined  complying  with  this  demand. 

General  Bernadotte,  now  become  Prince  Royal  of  Sweden, 
was  travelling  in  great  splendor  and  magnificence  from 
Paris  to  Stockholm.  In  his  correspondence  with  the  king 
and  in  a  variety  of  speeches  and  answers  to  addresses  while 
he  was  on  the  road,  and  after  his  arrival,  he  was  manifesting 
his  gratitude,  his  devotion  to  his  new  country,  and  his 
prodigality  of  life  for  her  glory  and  defence.  On  the  2nd  of 
November  he  made  his  public  and  solemn  entry  at  Stock- 
holm, was  adopted  by  the  king,  as  his  son,  and  assumed  the 
name  of  Charles  John.  A  few  days  afterwards  the  French 
minister  at  Stockholm,  Alquier,  presented  a  note,  demand- 
ing the  seizure  and  confiscation  of  all  English  manufactures 
of  colonial  articles,  the  prohibition  of  their  importation  into 
Sweden  for  the  future  under  any  flag  whatever,  and  an  im- 
mediate declaration  of  war  against  England.  And  he  added, 
that  unless  a  satisfactory  answer  was  given  to  their  demands 
within  five  days,  he  was  directed  to  ask  for  his  passports  and 
return  home.  At  the  same  time,  the  Swedish  government 
were  informed  by  a  courier  from  Baron  Lagesbjelke,1  their 

1  Lagelbielke,  in  Vandal,  II.  467. 


552 


THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1810 


minister  at  Paris,  that  the  Emperor  Napoleon  had  told  him, 
that  if  Sweden  did  not  comply  with  his  demands,  he  would 
not  only  seize  upon  Swedish  Pomerania,  about  which  he  ob- 
served they  did  not  seem  to  care  much,  but  that  he  would 
bring  both  Russia  and  Denmark  upon  her  at  once.  Sweden, 
therefore,  has  declared  war  against  England;  has  prohibited 
both  the  importation  and  exportation  of  all  English  and 
colonial  articles  of  merchandize  under  any  flag,  and  has 
ordered  those  already  imported  since  the  24th  of  last  April 
to  be  seized  and  placed  at  the  king's  disposal  according  to 
the  laws  of  the  kingdom.  For  Sweden  having  a  constitution, 
and  calling  itself  a  free  state,  the  power  of  arbitrary  confis- 
cation was  not  in  the  king. 

The  refusal  of  Russia  to  seize  and  confiscate,  or  to  shut  her 
ports  against  future  importations  of  colonial  articles  was  com- 
municated to  the  French  Ambassador  on  the  first  of  this  month, 
and  he  immediately  dispatched  it  by  a  courier  to  his  government. 
The  determination  of  the  Emperor,  of  Count  Romanwff,  and  of 
the  whole  Imperial  Council  is  said  to  be  fixed  and  unalterable, 
and  I  hope  will  prove  so  at  the  test  to  which  I  think  it  will  be 
brought;  but  if  a  message  comes,  like  that  to  Sweden,  which  is 
not  impossible,  the  necessity  of  commerce  and  the  real  regard 
for  the  United  States,  which  is  undissembled  and  unimpaired, 
may  yield  to  the  first  principle  of  the  Russian  policy  at  this 
time,  which  is  at  all  events  to  keep  on  good  terms  with  France. 

I  am  with  the  utmost  respect,  etc. 


1 8 10]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  553 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE  ~ 

No.  35.  [ROBERT  SMITH] 

ST.  PETERSBURG,  15/27  December,  1810. 

SIR: 

Mr.  W.  B.  Adams,  who  arrived  last  summer  at  Archangel, 
and  who  brought  me  despatches  from  your  Department, 
being  now  in  this  city  and  desirous  of  returning  as  speedily 
as  possible  to  the  United  States,  has  determined  to  go  by 
land  to  Gothenburg  in  the  expectation  of  finding  there  some 
American  vessel  about  to  return  home,  in  which  he  may  take 
passage.  I  have  procured  for  him,  and  for  a  Mr.  Strong1  who 
goes  with  him,  passports  as  couriers  from  Count  Romanzoff 
and  from  Count  Stedingk  the  Swedish  ambassador,  which 
will  expedite  their  journey  to  Gothenburg,  and  have  in- 
trusted to  them  both  despatches  for  you,  as  they  will  prob- 
ably return  by  different  vessels.  Mr.  Strong's  intention  is, 
if  he  finds  it  practicable,  to  go  first  to  England.  Mr.  Adams 
is  also  charged  with  despatches  from  this  government  to 
Count  Pahlen. 

I  have  detained  him  several  days,  in  order  to  inform  you 
of  the  ultimate  decision  here  respecting  the  admission  of  the 
American  vessels,  which  arrived  at  the  out  ports  in  the 
Baltic  and  Gulf  of  Finland,  after  the  navigation  for  the 
season  was  closed  at  Cronstadt.  I  have  had  two  interviews 
with  Baron  Campenhausen  on  this  subject,  and  indeed  have 
detained  Mr.  Adams  at  his  request.  He  yesterday  informed 
me,  that  after  a  full  examination  and  consideration  it  had 
been  concluded  that  all  the  American  vessels,  excepting  one 
or  two  with  cargoes  of  a  suspicious  character,  should  be  ad- 

1  Benjamin  H.  Strong. 


554  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [iSio 

mitted  and  allowed  to  dispose  of  their  cargoes,  and  that  I 
might  consider  and  write  of  the  matter  as  settled.  The  de- 
termination still  requires  the  sanction  of  the  Emperor  and  if  not 
affected  by  the  arrival  of  a  French  courier  yesterday  morning 
from  Paris,  that  will  undoubtedly  be  conformable  to  the  assur- 
ance given  by  Baron  Campenhausen. 

In  my  last  letter  I  stated  to  you  that  the  first  principle  of  the 
present  Russian  policy  was  at  all  events  to  keep  upon  good  terms 
with  France.  This  disposition  is  certainly  not  on  the  part  of 
France  reciprocal.  Since  the  marriage  of  the  Emperor  Napo- 
leon a  continual  series  of  measures  in  rapid  succession  has 
manifested  a  spirit  of  hostility  to  Russia  scarcely  covered  with 
a  veil  of  271.  848.  887.  560.  1032.  1053.  1501.  1098,  and  news- 
paper endearments.  The  reunion  of  Holland  to  the  French 
Empire,  the  dexterous  vault  of  a  French  general  into  the  Swedish 
succession,  an  active  and  formidable  organization  of  troops  in 
the  Duchy  of  Warsaw,  the  establishment  of  a  large  French 
garrison  at  Dantzick,  and  the  encouragement,  perhaps  even 
assistance,  secretly  furnished  to  the  Turks  for  the  continuance 
of  the  war  which  is  exhausting  the  Russian  finances,  are  indica- 
tions of  the  French  policy  towards  Russia,  of  which  Russia  is  by 
no  means  ignorant  and  to  which  she  is  nothing  less  than  blind. 
She  sees  it  all  and  feels  it  to  the  quick,  but  as  every  measure  of 
this  kind  is  taken  without  consulting  Russia,  when  she  comes  to 
deliberate  upon  it  the  time  for  consultation  is  irrevocably  past, 
and  the  principle  of  keeping  at  all  events  upon  good  terms  with 
France  checks  the  hand  of  opposition  and  silences  the  voice  of 
remonstrance.  Until  lately,  however,  France  has  abstained 
from  demanding  of  Russia  measures  ruinous  to  her  own  in- 
terests and  derogatory  to  her  independence.  Such  demands  are 
now  made,  and  as  I  have  informed  you  have  met  with  denial. 
It  is  not  probable  that  France  will  be  satisfied  with  this,  and  I 
think  the  relations  between  the  two  countries  are  approaching 


i8io]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  555 

to  a  crisis  on  a  'point  highly  interesting  to  us.  From  every  as- 
surance I  have  had,  and  from  every  quarter  I  am  certain,  that 
the  determination  to  resist  to  the  last  has  been  deliberately  taken 
here,  but  at  the  moment  of  extremity  I  still  apprehend  the  issue 
will  be  such  as  all  my  late  letters  have  led  you  to  expect.1 

I  have  not  time  at  present  to  write  you  more  at  large;  but 
I  hope  in  a  few  days  to  have  another  opportunity  of  which  I 
shall  avail  myself.  Mr.  J.  S.  Smith  took  leave  at  court  last 
Monday,  and  leaves  us  in  the  course  of  two  or  three  days. 
He  goes  to  Berlin,  Dresden,  Vienna  and  Paris.  He  goes 
universally  regretted  by  all  who  have  had  the  pleasure  of 
knowing  him  here;  and  particularly  by  myself.  Mr.  Harris 
the  Consul  is  also  going  on  a  tour  of  six  weeks  or  two  months 
to  Archangel  and  Moscow. 

I  am  most  respectfully,  etc. 

1  Cypher. 


•CENTRAL  RESERVE 


r  I  ^HE  following  pages  contain  advertisements  of  books 
•*•      by  the  same  author  or  on  kindred  subjects. 


Volume  1—1776-1796 
Volume  11—1796-1801 

The  Writings  of  John  Quincy  Adams 

EDITED  BY  WORTHINGTON  C.  FORD 

To  be  Completed  in  Twelve  Volumes 
VOLUME  I — 1779-1796  CLOTH,  Svo,  $3.50  NET  VOLUME  II — 1796-1801 

Only  those  writings,  which  are  of  a  permanent  historical  value 
and  which  are  essential  to  a  comprehension  of  the  man  in  all  his 
private  and  public  relations  are  chosen  for  this  notable  collec- 
tion. Nothing  has  been  suppressed  by  the  editor  which  can 
contribute  to  this  main  purpose.  John  Quincy  Adams  led  a  very 
eventful  life,  more  than  fifty  years  of  it  having  been  passed  in 
public  service.  He  was  at  all  times  a  prolific  writer  and  corre- 
spondent and  has  left  behind  him  a  great  mass  of  material.  A  dis- 
criminating selection  from  this  will  be  of  the  utmost  value,  not  only 
because  of  the  light  which  it  throws  upon  one  of  the  leaders  of  our 
early  democracy,  but  also  in  that  it  will  serve  to  vivify  the  social 
customs  of  an  age  that  is  past.  The  years  covered  by  the  first  volume 
are  1779-1796.  The  second  volume  covers  the  years  of  1796-1801. 
It  contains  the  letters  and  dispatches  which  were  written  by  Mr. 
Adams  while  he  was  United  States  Minister  at  The  Hague  and  at 
Berlin,  and  when  he  was  the  only  American  representative  in  Europe 
of  experience. 

"The  unsealing  of  most  interesting  material  .  .  .  the  remaining  volumes  will 
be  anticipated  by  students  of  history  with  keen  interest." — Boston  Transcript. 


« 


.  whoever  begins  the  work  will  be  sure  not  only  to  finish  it,  but  to  follow 
it  up  with  the  ensuing  volumes  no  matter  how  many  there  may  be." — JAMES  L. 
FORD  in  The  New  York  Herald. 


PUBLISHED   BY 

THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY 

Publishers        64-66  Fifth  Avenue        New  York 


The  Letters  of  Richard  Henry  Lee 

Collected  and  Edited  by  JAMES  CURTIS  BALLAGH,  PH.D.,  LL.D. 
Associate  Professor  of  American  History  in  the  Johns  Hopkins  University 

Published  under  the  Auspices  of  the  National  Society  of  the  Colonial  Dames  of 

America 

In  two  volumes,  each,  cloth,  8vo,  $2.50  net;  by  mail,  $2.69 

This,  the  second  and  final  volume  of  Lee's  correspondence,  contains 
one  hundred  and  ninety-one  letters  drawn,  like  those  in  the  preceding 
volume,  from  the  most  varied  sources — the  Papers  of  the  Continental 
Congress,  the  Arthur  Lee  Papers,  the  Adams  Papers,  the  Papers  of 
Henry  Laurens  and  Jefferson  and  Madison.  Most  of  them  have 
never  before  been  printed.  They  are  especially  abundant  for  the 
years  1779,  1780,  1781,  1784  and  1785,  but  extend  to  the  year  of  Lee's 
death,  1794.  They  cast  a  flood  of  light,  in  the  years  mentioned,  upon 
the  doings  of  the  Continental  Congress,  upon  Lee's  own  political  ac- 
tivities and  those  of  his  relatives  and  friends;  upon  Virginia  politics, 
upon  the  foreign  relations  of  the  infant  United  States,  and  upon  the 
period  when  its  present  Constitution  was  being  formed  and  put  into 
operation. 

"Another  valuable  source  of  history  is  put  at  the  disposal  of  the  general  reader. 
The  volume  is  full  of  first-hand  information,  and  provides  not  only  interesting 
reading,  but  throws  new  light  upon  the  most  critical  period  of  our  history." — • 
Brooklyn  Citizen. 

"It  contains  about  five  hundred  letters  written  by  Richard  Henry  Lee  to  various 
persons,  all  of  them  reliable  texts,  taken  from  original  manuscripts  or  transcripts, 
many  of  them  of  great  public  and  historical  importance,  much  of  it  preserved  by 
his  correspondents,  scattered  widely  here  or  there.  Lee's  distinguished  public 
services,  patriotically  given  to  the  founding  and  development  of  the  American 
Republic,  together  with  the  wisdom  and  loyalty  which  characterized  these  services, 
render  these  '  Letters '  very  valuable.  They  constitute  a  contribution  of  rare  value 
to  the  historical  and  colonial  literature  of  the  country." — Telescope. 

"A  welcome  and  valuable  addition  to  the  documentary  history  of  the  Revolu- 
tion."— New  York  Sun. 

"The  letters  will  be  welcomed  for  their  historical  as  well  as  intrinsic  value  for 
biographical  purposes." — Boston  Herald. 

"An  important  contribution  to  historical  literature  and  should  prove  deeply 
interesting  to  the  student  and  entertaining  to  any  reader." — Baltimore  Evening  Sun. 


THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY 

Publishers        64-66  Fifth  Avenue        New  York 


The  Life  of  Benjamin  Disraeli 
Earl  of  Beaconsfield 

By  WILLIAM  FLAVELLE  MONYPENNY 

Vol.  I,  1804-1837 
Vol.  II,  1837-1846 

Each  illustrated,  cloth,  8vo,  401  pages,  $3.00  net;  by  mail,  $3.18 

"Benjamin  Disraeli  was  doubtless  one  of  the  most  picturesque,  brilliant,  and 
astute  politicians  that  England  ever  produced.  There  are  few  of  the  older  men 
of  this  generation,  familiar  with  the  political  events  of  the  Victorian  period  of  Brit- 
ish history,  who  have  not  formed  firm  convictions  of  this  man's  character  and 
influence.  He  was  in  all  probability  the  most  aggressive  statesman,  and  the  most 
highly  praised  and  severely  criticised  man  that  ever  rose  to  fame  and  influence 
in  the  British  Parliament.  Although  dead  for  a  generation,  men  had  not  ceased 
to  wonder  at  the  enormous  success  he  was  able  to  achieve  against  odds  which,  to 
ordinary  mortals,  would  have  seemed  impossible  barriers." — Boston  Herald. 

"It  is  on  the  whole  a  very  human,  though  egotistical  Disraeli  that  the  biog- 
rapher gives  us,  brilliant,  witty,  ambitious,  but  by  no  means  the  unscrupulous 
adventurer  that  the  late  Goldwin  Smith  and  other  enemies  have  depicted.  His 
best  defence  is  his  own  personal  letters,  which  the  author  has  wisely  allowed  to 
constitute  the  bulk  of  the  book." — Chicago  Record-Herald. 


A  COMPANION  VOLUME  TO  THE  ABOVE 

i 

Whigs  and  Whiggism,  Political  Writings 

By  BENJAMIN  DISRAELI 

Edited  with  an  Introduction  by  William  Hutcheon. 

Cloth,  8w,  ill.,  $3.00  net,  postpaid,  $3.16 

Readers  will  be  able  to  trace  by  these  writings,  many  of  which  are 
here  published  for  the  first  time,  the  gradual  evolution  of  a  career 
that  in  its  opening  stages  offered  so  many  enigmas  to  the  historian, 
and  has  been  so  diversely  interpreted. 


PUBLISHED  BY 

THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY 

Publishers        64-66  Fifth  Avenue        New  York 


TWO  NEW  IMPORTANT  BOOKS  ON   GOVERNMENT 

The  Establishment   of   State  Government 
in  California,  1846-1850 

By  CARDINAL  GOODWIN,  M.A. 

Cloth,  8w,  $1.50  net 

The  author  divides  his  work  into  three  main  parts  entitled  The 
Inter-Regnum,  The  Constitutional  Convention  and  The  Organiza- 
tion of  State  Government.  Under  these  general  heads  he  takes  up, 
among  other  topics,  the  following: — American  Influence  and  the 
Conquest,  The  Period  of  Military  Rule,  Gold  and  Its  Problems,  Or- 
ganization of  the  Convention,  The  Departments  of  Government,  The 
Free  Negro  Question  Determining  the  Eastern  Boundary,  Corpora- 
tions and  Banks,  Education  and  Taxation,  The  Convention's  Work 
Completed,  Sources  of  the  Constitution,  The  First  Legislature,  The 
Governor's  Message  and  Finance,  Civil  or  Common  Law,  Provisions 
for  Local  Government,  The  Land  Question  and  Other  Enactments 
of  the  State  Legislature,  The  Sectional  Character  of  the  First  Legisla- 
ture and  Admission  to  Statehood. 

The  American  Doctrine  of  Judicial  Su- 
premacy 

By  CHARLES  GROVE  HAINES,  PH.D. 

Professor  of  Political  Science  in  Whitman  College 

Cloth,  I2mo,  $2.00  net 

It  is  the  purpose  of  this  volume  to  present  an  account  of  the  origin 
and  development  of  the  practice  of  judicial  control  over  legislation  in 
the  United  States.  The  source  of  this  power  is  traced  from  the  ancient 
and  mediaeval  concept  of  the  law  of  nature,  from  the  idea  of  a  higher 
law  made  vital  and  attractive  in  Coke's  theory  of  the  supremacy  of 
the  common-law  courts,  and  from  precedents  during  colonial  and 
revolutionary  times  until  its  emergence  as  a  recognized  principle  of 
American  constitutional  law.  Special  attention  is  given  to  the  differ- 
ences between  the  power  as  conceived  by  judges  in  the  eighteenth 
and  early  nineteenth  centuries  and  the  practice  of  judicial  review  in 
the  last  few  decades.  The  opposition  encountered  in  the  early  years 
of  judicial  control  and  in  subsequent  periods  of  American  history  is 
reviewed,  including  a  discussion  of  recent  criticisms  by  justices,  by 
labor  leaders  and  by  Socialists.  Data  from  many  sources  relative  to 
the  theory  and  practice  of  judicial  review  of  legislation  are  brought 
within  brief  compass. 

THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY 

Publishers        64-66  Fifth  Avenue         New  York 


The  Hon.  DEAN  C.    WORCESTER'S  New  Book 

The  Philippines 

BY   DEAN    C.    WORCESTER 

Secretary  of  the  Interior,  Philippine  Insular  Government,  1901-1913 
Author  of"  The  Philippine  Islands  and  Their  People,"  etc. 

2  vohtmes,  Decorated  Cloth,  Illustrated,  8vo,  $6.00  net 

There  is  no  greater  authority  on  these  insular  possessions  than  Mr.  Worcester  who,  as 
early  as  1887,  and  again  in  1890  was  a  prominent  member  of  scientific  expeditions  to  the 
Islands  ;  from  1899  to  1901  was  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  Philippine  Commission  ;  since  1901 
has  been  Secretary  of  the  Interior  to  the  Insular  Government,  and  who  in  1899  published 
"  The  Philippine  Islands  and  Their  People,"  a  record  of  personal  observation  and  experi- 
ence, with  a  short  summary  of  the  more  important  facts  in  the  history  of  the  archipelago, 
which  has  ever  since  been  the  acknowledged  standard  work  of  information  concerning  the 
Islands. 

In  Mr.  Worcester's  valuable  new  work,  past  and  present  conditions  are  minutely  re- 
viewed with  regard  for  strict  accuracy  of  statement.  The  author's  position  giving  him  free 
access  to  all  the  government  records,  much  of  the  information  thus  made  available  has 
never  been  before  made  public.  With  practically  unlimited  material  on  which  to  draw  in 
the  way  of  illustrations,  very  fine  and  rare  photographs  intimately  related  with  the  text 
emphasize  the  lessons  which  they  are  respectively  intended  to  teach. 

The  result  is  a  work  of  the  greatest  importance  as  well  as  of  the  greatest  interest  to  all 
concerned  as  to  the  future  possibilities  of  the  Philippines  and  as  to  the  course  the  United 
States  Government  should  pursue  in  the  interest  of  the  several  peoples  of  the  Islands. 

CONTENTS 

Chapter  I.  — View  Point  and  Subject  Matter.  Chapter  II.  —  Was  Independence  Promised  ?  Chap- 
ter III. —  Insurgent  "Cooperation."  Chapter  IV. — The  Premeditated  Insurgent  Attack.  Chapter 
V.  —  Insurgent  Rule  and  the  Wilcox-Sargeant  Report.  Chapter  VI.  —  Insurgent  Rule  in  the  Caga- 
yan  Valley.  Chapter  VII.  —  Insurgent  Rule  in  the  Visayas  and  Elsewhere.  Chapter  VIII.  —  Did 
We  Destroy  a  Republic?  Chapter  IX.  —  The  First  Philippine  Commission.  Chapter  X.  —  The 
Conduct  of  the  War.  —  Chapter  XI. —The  Second  Philippine  Commission.  Chapter  XII. — The 
Establishment  of  Civil  Government.  Chapter  XIII. — The  Philippine  Constabulary  and  Public 
Order.  Chapter  XIV.  —  American  Governors.  Chapter  XV.  —  Health  Conditions.  Chapter  XVI. 

—  Baguio  and   the   Benguet    Road.     Chapter  XVII.  —  Coordination  of  Scientific  Work.      Chapter 
XVIII.  —  Improved  Means  of  Communication.     Chapter  XIX.  —  Education.     Chapter  XX.  —  The 
Administration  of  Justice.     Chapter  XXI.  —  Financial  Reform.     Chapter  XXII.  —  The  Philippine 
Forests.     Chapter  XXIII.  —  Philippine  Lands.     Chapter  XXIV.  —  Peace  and  Prosperity.     Chapter 
XXV.  —  Commercial   Possibilities  of  the  Philippines.     Chapter  XXVI. —The  Picturesque  Philip- 
pines.    Chapter  XXVII.  —  Fish  and  Game.     Chapter  XXVIII.  —  The  Exploration  of  Non-Christian 
Territory.     Chapter  XXIX.  —  The  Government  of  Non-Christian  Tribes.     Chapter  XXX.  —  The 
Government  of  Non-Christian  Tribes  (continued) .    Chapter  XXXI.  —  Corrigenda.    Chapter  XXXII. 

—  Non-Christian  Tribe  Problems.    Chapter  XXXIII.  —  Slavery  in  the  Philippine  Islands.     Chapter 
XXXIV. —  The    Philippine    Assembly.     Chapter    XXXV.  — Is   Independence    Possible?    Chapter 
XXXVI.  —The  Future  of  the  Philippines. 


THE   MACMILLAN   COMPANY 

Publishers  64-66  Fifth  Avenue  New  York 


f  * . 


